Being from St. Louis and having come of age in the 1960s, it is not surprising that many of my heroes were St. Louis Cardinals. The greatest game I ever attended was game one of the 1968 World Series in which Bob Gibson struck out 17 Detroit Tigers, a record that still stands. My most prized memento is a Trans World Airlines drink list with Hall of Fame outfielder Lou Brock's autograph that my father procured for me when he had the good fortune to be seated next to Brock.

Two of my baseball heroes died recently. Brock passed away at 81 on September 6 and Gibson at 84 on October 2, fifty-two years to the day of his most commanding performance. Each had had a brush with a cancer, so their deaths did not come as a complete surprise.

Obituaries have rightly pointed to their baseball excellence. They emphasize Gibson's absolutely dominant 1968 season in which he hurled thirteen complete game shutouts and achieved an impossible-to-imagine 1.12 earned run average, which is 32% below any other mark posted since the lords of baseball juiced the ball in 1920 to encourage crowd-pleasing offense. Nearly every account I've read or heard features teammates and opponents alike marveling at his ferocity, competitiveness, and downright orneriness. Gibson emerges as the intimidator par excellence, the pitcher who never hesitated to throw at a batter to claim control of the plate.

Brock's obituaries recall his daring on the base paths and resurrection of the stolen base as a weapon after years of neglect. Until the great Rickey Henderson surpassed both numbers, his 118 bases in a single season (1974) and 938 lifetime swipes were records. Praised for his guile and his refusal to give in to opposing pitchers and catchers, Brock earned plenty of plaudits for his ability to disrupt the normal flow of a game and give the Cardinals an advantage in scratching out runs during an era when runs were hard to come by.

I was fortunate enough to It was Gibson and Brock's excellence that propelled the Cardinals to three World Series in the 1960s. Once there, they were nearly unbeatable. In addition to Gibson's 17 strikeouts, there was his 7-2 won-loss record, eight complete games in nine starts, 1.89 ERA, and 92 strikeouts in 81 innings. With Brock, the notable figures are a .391 batting average (the highest among those who played 20 games or more) and 14 stolen bases.  

Watching them (and the wonderful centerfielder Curt Flood) from the bleachers on those muggy nights for which my hometown is justly famous taught me a great deal about craft. It was not simply the big moments that I enjoyed but the small ones as well: Flood's positioning, Brock's moving a couple inches off the plate to get a better look at the ball that he would hit to left field rather than trying to pull it to right, Gibson's waste pitch. For what was crucial about the Cardinals was less their natural abilities (and, lord knows, they had those) but how they harnessed them.

Recent memorials have emphasized Gibson the angry intimidator, the possessor of an unparalleled piercing stare and Brock, the speedy trickster. All those things were true. Gibson, after all, threw at people in old-timers games. Downplayed in these paeans to Gibson's competitiveness and Brock's daring do is how hard they worked to make themselves winners.

Gibson was 32 in that fabulous year of 1968 and Brock was 35 when he broke Maury Wills's single season stolen base record. Gibson, as athletic a man as ever pitched, always insisted that pitching was ninety percent mental.[Roger Angell, "Bob Gibson Keeps His Distance" *The New Yorker* https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/1980/09/22/distance] His explanation for the zone that he was in during the entirety of 1968 was that he finally was bright enough about pitching. Brock didn't get faster as he got older, he got more experienced, better able to read tiny flaws in pitchers' deliveries that would allow him
