Pitching is about ninety per cent thinking,” Gibson went on. “I threw hard when I was younger, but I didn’t know how to get people out. I don’t care how hard you throw, somebody’s going to hit it if you don’t think out there. It’s not all that detailed—you don’t think three or four pitches ahead. But one pitch might set up the next two you throw—it depends what the guy does with it. You know. If he misses a fastball by a foot, then he’ll see another one. If he fouls it off or_just_misses it, he’ll probably get a breaking ball next. It isn’t exactly scientific, or anything.”

The man is indivisible, and it is the wonder of him. It is my own suspicion that both sportswriters and fans are increasingly resentful of the fame and adulation and immense wealth that are now bestowed so swiftly upon so many young professional athletes, and are envious of their privileged and apparently carefree style of living. The resentment is a half-conscious appreciation of the fact that they themselves—the fans and the media people, that is—have to a great degree created these golden youths, and because of that there is indeed a wish to own them; to demand ceaseless, inhumanly repeated dazzling performances from them on the field, and to require absolute access to their private lives as well. Most athletes, who are very young when they first come to prominence and, for the most part, have a very limited experience of the world, respond to these demands either with a convulsive, wholly artificial public “image” of affability, or (more often, of late) with surliness or angry silence. Bob Gibson did neither. Somehow, he has always kept his distance and his strangeness, and there is something upright and old-fashioned about such stubborn propriety. He is there if anyone really wants to close that space—the whole man, and not a piece of him or an image of him—but many of us may prefer not to do so, because at a distance (from sixty feet six inches away, perhaps) he stands whole and undiminished, and beyond our envy: the athlete incarnate, the player.

Gibson’s roommate on the trip was a public-relations man with one of the major-league teams, who was acting as an escort and travel agent for the group. Early in the trip, the infielder let drop some plainly anti-Semitic remarks about the P.R. man, who was Jewish, and Gibson stopped him in mid-sentence and advised him to keep his distance and not to talk to him for the remainder of the trip. “And if I ever pitch against you,” Gibson said levelly, “I’m going to hit you on the coconut with my first pitch.” Fortunately (or perhaps \_un\_fortunately), the two never did play against each other.

https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/1980/09/22/distance

Racism was a way of life . . . It was there and followed me through the childhood and not just through the childhood but the first part of my major league career. That fueled a lot of the anger that I suppose I projected. I don't know, I'd have to be on the outside looking in. All I knew is the way I felt. And I felt that I'd have to be better just to get just as far. And I was determined to do that.

At age 32, I was probably as bright as I was ever going to be. . . I had complete control over the game. 35% lower 

Calcaterra on the huzzahs about Bauer:
t’s all an exercise in projection, though, with the reporter likely bringing in subconscious personal baggage. Silly notions about how they themselves could be that guy if they had only worked a bit harder. It’s also an exercise in racism on some level or another. Reporters have historically discounted the physical gifts of white players and played up their brains and character while discounting the hard work, brains, and character of Black and Latino players, who are often referred to “gifted” or “specimens.” The former group is often said to have “exceeded their limitations.” The latter is often criticized for having “wasted their natural talent.” It’s toxic garbage.