### On Feller
#Feller
#SHEAR

Times article details criticisms that are both valid and questionable (provided reported correctly).

- Given the controversial nature of the paper and Jackson, inviting indigenous and black scholars seems a no-brainer. With a provisio that there is no single view. If the profession hopes to be more inclusive that should have been carried out as a matter of course. This seems to be the focus of the story and the I don't care about Jackson comment is telling here. 
- On the singling out of women only for criticism, can't tell from the article if it is noteworthy or not. Might be, but may be a matter of prominent scholars. Kinda doubt it the latter.
- The complaint about redskins (the implied quotes) seems a case of censoring history. And raises the question of the damage that words cause. Proper quotation does not signify authorial agreement with what the term has come to mean or the motives that drove its creation. 
- The "I don't care about Jackson" comment -- speaks to the inability still to integrate different modes of experience. Marxism made a stab of it but has been challenged both on its quotidian and non-ruling history on the one hand and on its teleological, macro ruling level on the other. No likely candidate. 
- In general sympathetic with a criticism that inclusivity is necessary for truth telling about the past. But the issue would have to be why necessary, what is missed about the story being told. And why some stories are worth telling. 

[Devon](x-devonthink-item://F497EBC7-3987-423C-8F73-49A746B43EF1)