### Notes on Linux for today 

Solved some problems with Atom -- multi-line snippets, keybinding for date:date command. Obsidian has, all of a sudden, done automatic links in the Atom manner.

Have gotten Autokey to work with headnote and YAML

Had found Brydge keyboard usable, but iPad is not a work machine. Can do rough notes, of course, but no zotero or pandoc. Scrivener was too complicated to be a full-working version. Ulysses, interestingly enough, has moved away from the simple writing app that it once was. Or so it seems. Makes me suspect that the criticism it received for subscription made developers set out to justify the switch and add stuff.

So best choice at the moment: laptop-external drive. Safe storage and portability combined.

Still wonder about Linux as the operating system. It does require a good deal of time to master, possessing as it does a rather large learning curve. I have Mac muscle memory (command-tab, for instance) and the OS has a goodly number of built-ins to handle most keyboard tasks. Alfred, Keyboard Maestro, Scrivener, and iCloud are all, on the face, better than ULauncher, Autokey, Abiword/Libre Office and Dropbox. Then there is a VPN, which is -- of course -- helpful for entering the personnel records at UR. (**`/opt/cisco/anyconnect/bin/vpnui`**). Resist the inclination to load Mac OS prematurely. Do a full test, learn Linux, find workarounds and possibilities.


Both accomplished poets, Herschberger and Merriam also held advanced degrees and had left-wing connections. 

