The new foundationalism was especially in evidence in thinking about the interplay of "self" and "society". The Self assumed new importance in light of an understanding that totalitarianism had triumphed because it exploited the unfulfilled psychic needs of individuals emeshed in a mass society. Interestingly, the postwar search for a continuous, stable self was conducted primarily as a psychological one rather than in the past one more suited for philosophy or religion.

A significant aspect of the search for self was rooting selfhood in biology. William Sheldon's somatypes that linked personality with body type, Alfred Kinsey's naturalistic study of human sexual behavior, Margaret Mead's meditation on sexual and gender differences, and orthodox Freudianism all anchored the self in a biological foundation, a position that did not go unchallenged. 

Complimenting the postwar nature-nurture debate was a related one– whether the self in America was so pressed in by others that it lost its autonomy or whether it lacked real and meaningful attachments. That played out in a culture-wide interest in loneliness, which subtly changed in meaning from the feeling that arose from being physically alone to the feelings that arose from insufficient or unrewarding connections. Here we examine how cultural artifacts from David Reisman's *Lonely Crowd*, such Westerns as *High Noon*, *Shane*, and *Lonely are the Brave*, George Tooker's paintings, Robert Frank's photographs in *Americans*, and Frank Sinatra's singing all put loneliness at the center of their work.

Both biology change and social insecurities converged in adolescence. Negotiating those changes, as Erik Erikson noted in his *Childhood and Society*, made adolescence a pivotal stage. How American teenagers would develop prompted reports from the field by, among others, sociologist James Coleman, professor of education Edgar Z. Freidenberg, and cultural anthropologist Jules Henry. It prompted a slew of movies for and about teenagers – the most famous being *Rebel Without a Cause* which saw the teenage problem as a lack of strong male role models– and a set of classic novels, J. D. Salinger's *Catcher in the Rye* and Sylvia Plath's, *Bell Jar*.

Viewed from the vantage of society writ large, many discerned convergences of previously opposed entities and celebrated acceptance of formerly excluded groups on relatively equal grounds. Princeton economist Richard Lester and the authors of *Fortune*'s *USA: The Permanent Revolution* noted that workers were more likely to view themselves as consumers and regard themselves as part of a broad working class. Likewise, sociologist Will Herberg took note of the decline of ancestral identities and the growing acceptance of Catholics and Jews, primarily because the three main faiths themselves had lost their theological precision. Although studies then and since have questioned the degree to which ethnics "Americanized", the changes provided  stark contrast with the nineteenth century. 

Racial exclusion, of course, remained one glaring exception but Nathan Glazer and Daniel Patrick Moynihan regarded it as irrational, bound to disappear when people of color adopted mainstream cultural patterns. Hastening the process, Swedish economist Gunnar Myrdal and associates wrote in *American Dilemma*, would be the recognition that exclusion violated central American values. The excluded, however, well knew inclusion would not happen without struggle. 

Many of the challenges to exclusion depended on the belief that the excluded  differed from those at the center of power and privilege in only superficial ways. The famous *Brown v. Board of Education* argued that the psychological harm that resulted from separation of the races rather than innate differences accounted for disparities in educational achievement. A similar emphasis appeared in Betty Friedan's *Feminine Mystique*, which strongly rejected long-standing notions of female biological inferiority and insisted women were entitled to a full human identity that did not restrict their goals. For their part, gay Americans could point to the pathbreaking work of Evelyn Hooker that conclusively demonstrated there existed no psychological or mental differences between gay and straight.

Although the tendency of the era was to favor integration on the grounds of fundamental similarity, voices ranging from Lorraine Hansberry to feminist Eve Meriam to Donald Webster Corey, author of *The Homosexual in America* warned that inclusion ran the risk of erasing differences that served as valuable resources Blacks, women and gays respectively. It was a position that would become more prominent in subsequent years.  

