  
Defining America and American ness was one of the signal undertakings of the era. It was, after all, the moment of F. O. Mathiessen's *American Renaissance*, and the related myth and symbol school of Henry Nash Smith and Leo Marx, Alfred Kazin's *On Native Grounds*, the *Partisan Review* symposium on "Our Country and Our Culture," the celebrated work of Louis Hartz and Richard Hofstadter, the uses of Tocqueville's *Democracy in America* in among other places David Riesman's *Lonely Crowd*, and the Trinidadian Marxist CLR James' *American Civilization*. Nearly all assumed that the essence of America lay in either shared values or a comprehensive unifying container of human relations. 

Looming over these projects was, of course, the Cold War and the effort to create a sharp distinction between "American" and "un-American". Yet many of the key efforts of the period pushed against that impulse. American-ness turned out to be a variable, fleeting, and fugitive thing. For Kazin "If there was such a thing as America we did not possess it." Even as he endorsed the sentiments of acceptance of the state of affairs in the country, Trilling recognized America was becoming something it had not been.

By 21st century standards, these quests for the essential America are notable for what they exclude. Mathiessen's book rested on five white Northeast male writers. That selection ran counter to another centering current, social inclusion. Much social science emphasized convergences of previously opposed entities and celebrated acceptance of formerly excluded groups on relatively equal grounds. We have in mind such interventions as **Princeton** economist Richard Lester's finding that the rank-and-file tended to identify as consumers rather than workers, which narrowed the gap between blue and white collar workers. It was a view popularized in *Fortune* Magazine's *USA, the Permanent Revolution*. Likewise, as the work of Will Herberg famously argued, ancestral identities declined in ****salience** and religious prejudice against Catholics and Jews faded. Although studies then **and** since have questioned the degree to which ethnics "Americanized", the changes provided  stark contrast with the nineteenth century. 

Such mainstream analysts as Nathan Glazer and Daniel Patrick Moynihan recognized continuing racial exclusion but regarded it as irrational, bound to disappear when people of color adopted mainstream cultural patterns. Hastening the process, Swedish economist Gunnar Myrdal and associates wrote in *American Dilemma* would be the recognition that exclusion violated central American values. The excluded, however, knew inclusion would not happen without struggle. 

Many of the challenges to exclusion depended on the belief that the excluded  differed from those at the center of power and privilege in only superficial ways. The famous *Brown v. Board of Education* argued that separation of the races rather than innate differences accounted for disparities in educational achievement. A similar emphasis appeared in Betty Friedan's *Feminine Mystique* with its rejection of long-standing notions of female biological inferiority and its insistence that women were entitled to a full human identity that did not restrict their goals. For their part, gay Americans could point to the pathbreaking work of Evelyn Hooker that conclusively demonstrated there existed no psychological or mental differences between gay and straight.

Although the tendency of the era was to favor integration on the grounds of fundamental similarity, voices ranging from Lorraine Hansberry to feminist Eve Meriam to Donald Webster Corey, author of *The Homosexual in America* warned that inclusion ran the risk of erasing differences that served as valuable resources Blacks, women and gays respectively. It was a position that would become more prominent in subsequent years.  


