At the Center event							12 November 2020

The title of our book speaks to the concerns that animated this collaboration.  On the most prosaic level, it refers to our chronological period—the center of the twentieth century—and more specifically the years between 1948 and 1963, the time of the “high” Cold War and US global hegemony.  That period witnessed a growing confidence among political and cultural leaders that, in the aftermath of the second World War, the US stood at the “center of things.”  As Columbia historian Jacques Barzun argued in 1952, the United States was now “quite simply the world power, which means: the center of world awareness: it was Europe that was provincial.”
	Such confidence coexisted with an undertow of dread, with the cultural and intellectual life of the country haunted by the global slaughter of the 1940s and the possibility of worse destruction to come.  Such fears animated many of the centering projects that occupy our attention—efforts to locate moral and epistemological principles that might guide human conduct, to chart pathways to psychological maturity, and to promote a humanism that would allow for inclusion of marginalized groups and solidarity across national boundaries.  In contrast to the historicism and pragmatism of the early twentieth century, the center of the twentieth century witnessed a new foundationalism, which in turn marked it off from the second revolt against formalism that came to the fore amid the conflicts of the late 1960s and 1970s.
	It should be noted that we have not written a history of what Arthur Schlesinger, Jr. called the “vital center” of American politics, though his brief for anticommunist liberalism gets its due in our book.  Nor have we recycled a story about Cold War “consensus,” even as we note the yearning for consensus in some quarters.  Our “long fifties” is not what the poet Robert Lowell called the “tranquilized fifties.”  What makes the period distinctive, in our view, is the search for centers and the recoil against such centering.  That dynamic—not any imagined consensus—is what we find “at the center” of the twentieth century.       
	The era’s centering impulse had a strong anti-historicist character, unusual in being self-conscious about its own historicity.  The horrors of contemporary history demanded a turn away from history understood as a story of progress.  Albert Camus signaled this shift in his 1946 essay, “Neither Victims nor Executioners,” which was immediately translated by the American radical Dwight Macdonald.  “We cannot ‘escape History,’ since we are in it up to our necks,” Camus wrote.  “But one may propose to fight within History to preserve from History that part of man which is not in its proper province.”   That fight was taken up by US thinkers ranging from Macdonald on the anarchist left to Richard Weaver on the traditionalist right, as well as leading figures in the philosophy of science, anthropology, social psychology, Zen Buddhism, and Christian theology.  This was, to be sure, not Fukuyama’s “end of history” but an effort to safeguard meaning and purpose in an age of authoritarian movements and total war. 
	Yet anti-historicism and the quest to center human experience generated fierce opposition, again creating unwitting alliances between figures who are rarely considered together.  The cultural critic Kenneth Burke and advocates of “modernization” theory maintained a historicist worldview, as did practicing historians.  The search for a stable self, secure against the forces of social control, coexisted with constant anxiety about loneliness as a paralyzing feature of modern existence—manifest in David Riesman’s  The Lonely Crowd and Frank Sinatra’s ballads alike.  The New Critics in literature and Clement Greenberg in the visual arts sought to fix the meaning of modernist works in their formal properties.  They faced a sharp rebuke from the “relational” aesthetics pioneered at Black Mountain College, the new American poetry movements in New York and San Francisco, and the “Happenings” of the late fifties and early sixties.   These new modernists abandoned the autonomous art object for art as performance, fractured audience perspective, and sought to erase the boundary between “art” and “real life.”  The era’s assimilationist projects likewise faced challenges from many quarters, notably from Black artists and intellectuals like Lorraine Hansbury, Miles Davis, James Baldwin, Nina Simone, and Amiri Baraka, but also from “informal” assertions of difference such as the turnout of gay men for Judy Garland’s 1961 comeback concert at Carnegie Hall.   And the struggle of political elites to maintain the country’s place at “the center of world awareness” suffered one shock after another from movements for decolonization.
	History could not be banished, in other words, and by 1963 history returned with a vengeance--in Vietnam, in Dallas, and in Birmingham.  Americans have ever since lived on edge.


Brick email–

Briefly (because it's getting late and I've already drunk too much whisky!), I second Casey's suggestion that the first paragraph can go--on the grounds that Casey would have already covered the basics in that regard--and you can talk more about the "self" issues you dealt with in ch. 4, which could replace the discussion of American culture (your precis of ch. 2).  You can point to some of the distinctive approaches you brought to bear on the period in ch. 4:  the peculiar combination of a new psychological focus on self-formation with a resurgence of naturalism/biology (from Sheldon to Mead, Kinsey, etc.); the theme of loneliness; the focus on adolescence/teenagers as that was variously examined, as in Plath as a companion/alternative to Salinger.  That way of anatomizing the social-psychological range of key concerns in that time is so sharp and illuminating (I love it!), you should highlight it.  And this alongside the discussion of inclusion/exclusion you treated in 5.  
  
I'm thinking I will talk about the problems of conceiving/constructing volumes such as this (i.e., finding a theme that is neither so definite and restrictive that it presents a thematic procustean bed to which all features must be cut to conform, nor so broad as to be overly general, indefinite, or akin to platitude) . . . and then I will take those matters into questions of periodization as we reconceive it:  not "the Fifties" (versus "the Sixties") but rather a "mid-century" with porous boundaries.  
  
I might have too much to say.  I'm inclined to talk about "Still Waters Run Deep" and Lindy's, but perhaps I should let that go. I think that origin story has some merit . . . but you _crucially explained_ to me at some point why what we've actually done with _ATC_ is quite different from the way we thought then:  _then_, we were still thinking teleologically of the "50s" as "prelude" to "60s."  And in _ATC_ we set out _not_ to do that. [[TextEditor]]

	 
	    




 
