On Republicans at the Democratic convention:


I keep hearing how this stuff gives conservatives "permission" to vote for Biden. Fine, but they also had that last time, and too much reinforces the perception the parties aren't very different, giving disaffected lean-Dem voters "permission" not to vote.

Max Kennerly on Twitter



Nathan Tarkus on Twitter in regard to cupboard bare on relief

There is no policy program that effectively deals with Coronavirus and the economic damage its done that doesn't spend trillions and trillions of dollars. If the Biden administration thinks or acts as if the "cupboards are bare" we're just not going to recover for a decade.

on scolding students

College students will need to adapt their behaviors for universities to function in the fall, but students are not solely—or even primarily—responsible for keeping campuses safe. Shaming and threatening students will only obstruct public-health efforts. If universities want to reopen and stay open, administrators need to adopt a compassionate and realistic approach that supports students in staying socially connected and mentally healthy—not just free of coronavirus infection.

on pb reaction This is good, but it misses one key point: Middle class provincials often feel like they made it because/despite refusing to play by the rules of the “meritocratic” elites. Which is why they refuse to defer to “meritocrats” on anything, even mask-wearing.

obama Obama advised the players to hire Larry Summers to convene a working group on Richard Branson's private island to discuss producing a Netflix film about equality

The economy -- For all the talk of ‘fake news’ in the 2016 election, when Donald Trump would frequently mention how 40 million Americans required federal assistance just to eat – questioning how this represented success under Barack Obama – that figure was entirely accurate.

One explanation for the book’s tepid diagnosis is that the scale of neoliberalism’s breakdown is lost on an esteemed historian and journalist insulated from its worst impacts. This would certainly explain why Applebaum can only comprehend the present conjuncture as the result of mass irrationality and moral failure.


From NPR
President Trump's flair for the dramatic has introduced a sense of showmanship when it comes to nominating a Supreme Court justice.

On RBG not retiring
For any wondering why we are harping on “RBG should’ve retired”: 

The liberal refusal to view their leaders as tools to accomplish agendas, but rather view them as a projection of their own professional ambitions, has caused incalculable damage to even just the liberal project. (20 Sep. 2020)

But the American liberal proverb "powerful political individual X doesn't owe you anything" must be destroyed. They're means to ends on behalf of millions of ordinary people, and nothing more.

# eric levitz on rbg replacement


2)...Democrats have no obligation to let the timing of various deaths + the biases of Senate and Electoral College award Republicans a high court supermajority for a decade -- despite the fact that their party has lost the popular vote in 6 of 7 presidential elections...

And the idea that they are obligated to honor the right's fortuitous triumph is all the more absurd when one considers the profound unpopularity of the conservative judicial agenda (not least on corporate power) and the audacity of the modern right's judicial activism..

5) It is constitutional for Dems to add justices, and the end result of that action -- the gutting of judicial review -- is preferable to letting the unelected adherents of an extremist ideology dictate what the democratic branches of government can and can't do for a generation.
