#   Chapter Four:

## The De-centered Search for the Centered Self

  In James Baldwin's second novel, *Giovanni's Room* (1956),  his narrator-protagonist David tentatively concludes that he suddenly lit out for Europe for the peculiarly American reason that he “wanted to find myself.” The phrase, David insists, is not current “in the language of any other people” and “certainly does not mean what it says but betrays a nagging suspicion that something has been misplaced.”[@baldwin1956, p. 39] David's sojourn to the Old World does little to render his desires, inclinations, and capacities legible or stable. He remains unable to accept his homosexual longings, particularly for the titular character whom he abandons after Giovanni's conviction for murder, and is so alienated from himself that he is at the end startled by his reflection in the mirror and uncertain of “what moves in this body” and for “what this body is searching"(189).

Contemporaries criticized both the novel's unapologetic treatment of homosexuality and its failure to chronicle black life. These charges of decadence and elitism haunted Baldwin's career and obscured his insight that whites' demonization of blacks originated in the former's inability to know themselves. David's failure, therefore, spoke to a wider cultural problem and Baldwin was not the only observer who believed that Americans had few institutions to aid their search for self. Postwar commentators characteristically noted the presence of such psycho-social disorders as anomie loss of self, anxiety states, despair, rootlessness, apathy, meaninglessness, and loss of beliefs and values.  For some the problem lay with the absence of meaningful communities and interpersonal relations brought on by modernity writ large. Others blamed corporate bureaucracy, advertising, and a wide array of institutional demands for conformity such as schools, the media, and the isolation of suburban family life.[On alienation and isolation, see @josephson1962. For popular criticisms of suburbs, bureaucracy, and advertising respectively, see John Keats, *The Crack in the Picture Window* (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1957); @whyte1956; and  @packard1957.]

Postwar concern about the insubstantiality of selves quickly assumed a political cast. Arguing material and objective causes did not explain popular support for Fascist and Communist regimes, analysts turned to psychosocial abnormalities. Erich Fromm's *Escape from Freedom* (1941), Theodor Adorno's *Authoritarian Personality* (1950), philosopher Jacob Talmon’s *Origins of Totalitarian Democracy* (1952), and Hannah Arendt's *Origin of Totalitarianism* (1958) all attributed totalitarian success to the ability of ruling groups to manipulate unfulfilled psychological needs. Although fascist and communist ideologies had little appeal to most Americans, many commentators nonetheless worried that a society of anomic individuals who lacked internalized standards were fodder for poseurs and demagogues. That possibility no doubt fanned an interest in Tocqueville's argument that democracy produced citizens who sought safety i a culture of stifling uniformity and who were capable of massing against those who were distinctive or different.[@mcclay1994 contains a useful summary of the tendency to explain political phenomena by psycho-social factors.] Augmenting the theoretical work of the social critics was that of social psychologists Solomon Asch and Stanley Milgram, who obtained results that suggested most individuals lacked the psychological assuredness to resist a relentless majority or a demanding, unfeeling authority. Asch (1951, 1956) observed that subjects more often than not acceded to the group truth, even when it countered their own perceptions. For his part, Milgram discovered that most people would continue to punish others when ordered to do so. There was, many observers concluded a "Good German" in all of us.[The pertinent studies are @asch1951; @asch1956; and @milgram1963. For a discussion of the implications for the social psychology of postwar politics, see Israel Charny, *Fascism and Democracy in the Human Mind: A Bridge between Mind and Society* (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 2006)]

In meeting the growing weight of expectations placed on the self, Americans increasingly looked to psychological discourse or therapy rather than religion or philosophy. Where once Americans examined the state of their souls, their postwar counterparts more often than not turned their attention to their mental and emotional makeup. Emblematic of the shift was Rabbi Joshua Liebman's best-selling *Peace of Mind* (1947), which blended Talmudic wisdom with Freudian insight, and the rapid rise of pastoral counseling.[^5] Noteworthy too was the growth in the psychological profession. Five times as many doctorates in psychology were awarded in the 1950s as the decade before. The number of psychiatrists increased ten fold from 1939 to 1959.[@scull2010] With numbers came a new prestige. Alfred Hitchcock's*Spellbound* (1945) and Robert Linder’s *Fifty-Minute Hour* (1955) were indicative of the midcentury tendency to extol the psychiatrist as seer and depth psychology as the royal road to understanding motivation. Although Freud attracted the majority of acclaim, his rival Carl Jung was extraordinarily influential, especially in the growing field of personality testing. Two instruments -- the Thematic Apperception Test and the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator -- were deeply indebted to Jung's *Psychological Types* (1923).[@emre2018, p. 89-224] Small wonder, then, that *Life* Magazine hailed the 1950s as the "Age of Psychology."[^8]

[^5]: On the prominence of psychological discourse, see Alan Petigny, *The Permissive Society: America, 1941-1965* (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2009), 15-99; @herman1995; [@meyer1965] and [@stevens2010].

[^8]: The five-part *Life* series, written by Ernest Havemen first appeared January 7, 1957 and addressed psychological testing, psychology in the workplace, psychoanalysis, and the future of psychology.


Postwar American efforts to find themselves proceeded along a number of distinct but related paths. A significant tendency held that stable selfhood depended upon understanding and accepting the dictates of the body. For others it lay in finding the balance between biological endowments and social demands. Others wondered if society pressed too much or too little on individuals -- a question that emerged in the cultural prominence of the problem of loneliness. Few groups' quest for self was as scrutinized as that of teenagers. An emerging market, adolescents attracted intense concern over whether their evolving customs would allow them to become adults capable of meeting the challenges of the Cold War.

### Body and Self

The notion that biology determined selfhood enjoyed great respect during much of the first half of the twentieth century. Many scientists and critics believed that such traits as alcoholism, intelligence, and insanity had somatic causes and they used bodily defects as justification for psychiatric hospitals' programs of sterilization. Although Nazi genocide discredited the approach, especially when it took the form of race thinking, biological explanations for self and identity continued to circulate in American cultural and intellectual life. Pointing to human physicality provided a center for the self. In addition, as Nadine Weidman has observed, anchoring the self in a biological foundation countered Soviet claims to be building the new human.[@weidman2012]

No one was as insistent that the self was a function of body as psychologist William Sheldon (1898-1977). The godson of William James, Sheldon drew upon post-Mendelian modern genetics with its emphasis on multiple determinants of traits to lay out an elaborate form of somatic classification. His scheme rated physiques along seven-point scales on the basis of their sphericality, muscularity and linearity. He could then assign each body a three-digit number. Sheldon maintained that somatotypes remained fixed, even with weight change. He took a similar approach with personality, ranking on the basis of sixty traits that he claimed originated in bodily need and which fell into clusters around relaxation, muscular activity involving action and power, and restraint and inhibition. People with prominent guts (endomorphs) craved relaxation and pampering---both somatic and psychological. Muscle-bound men (mesomorphs) were driven toward action and power and took little note of others, and so on. Although Sheldon conceded both that traits could appear in different forms and that there were numerous cases in which morphologies did not match with manifest temperaments, he never doubted physique was destiny.

Not surprisingly, somatotypers were prone to snap judgments. Physical anthropologist Carl Seltzer breezily contended that weak (effeminate by his lights) body types (about 15% of the white, male population) were likely to lack psychic energy, proper motivation, sociability, and appropriate values. Sheldon applauded the 1-7-2 body (which had the highest muscularity and little sphericality or linearity) as the “incarnation of a heroic ideal,” the “masculine ideal of warlike and conquesting people,” the “American eagle of somatotypes” and claimed that the type was most often found in those who traced their heritage to Anglo-Saxon countries. His animal analogies for other categories were less complimentary.[^10]

[^10]: Carl C. Seltzer, “The Relationship Between the Masculine Component and Personality,” in *Personality in Nature, Society, and Culture*, Henry A. Murray and Clyde Kluckhohn, eds. (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1948), 84-96. William H. Sheldon, *Atlas of Men: A Guide for Somatotyping the Adult Male at All Ages* (New York: Harper, 1954), 67 for praise for 1-7-2.

Sheldon’s overt racism, support for eugenics, and ornery personality initially proved no obstacle to widespread acceptance of his “science.” Tapping the desire for grounded and knowable self, Sheldon's contention that the self was a consequence of its bodily form lay people and professionals alike a way to comprehend and classify the seeming diversity of human behavior and inclinations. Magazines ran such articles as “What Manner of Morph Are You?” and “How Your Shape Shapes Your Life.” Psychologists subjected numerous Ivy League freshmen to nude photographing sessions and psychological probing when arriving on campus. By the mid-1950s, however, Sheldonism was under critical scrutiny. Detractors charged he mixed causation with correlation, ignored changes in body type, offered “just so” stories as explanations, and had failed to produce convincing results despite years of measuring. His research assistant simply confirmed what critics suspected when she claimed he fudged his classifications so that body and personality type meshed.[^11]

[^11]: Patricia Vertinsky, “Physique as Destiny: William H. Sheldon, Barbara Honeyman Heath and the Struggle for Hegemony in the Science of Somatotyping,” *Canadian Bulletin of Medical History* Vol. 24, No. 2 (2007): 291-316; Anna G. Creadick, *Perfectly Average: The Pursuit of Normality in Postwar America* (Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 2010), 55-58.

Alfred Kinsey’s approach to the body-self relation has proven more politically and intellectually credible than Sheldon’s. A biologist who claimed to have no vested interest in the outcome, he undertook his famous reports on human sexual behavior as “first of all a report on what people do, which raises no question of what they should do.” Through innovative interview techniques, Kinsey and his associates obtained extensive data on such seemingly taboo acts as masturbation, homosexual contact, and non-marital intercourse. The results surprised many. Acts thought rare and often morally out of bounds turned out to be fairly common. Taken together, the non-heterosexual, non-marital acts outnumbered marital ones. Because individuals engaged in a variety of acts, Kinsey classified people not dichotomously but along a spectrum. One was not gay or straight but engaged in primarily one or both acts. Taking a decidedly amoral and biological position, Kinsey dismissed the views of those who regarded some acts immoral, criticizing those who did not “want to believe that there are gradations in these matters from one to the other extreme.”[^12] For Kinsey, all acts were undertaken for sexual release, or “outlet,” and were biologically commensurate. In subsequent years, detractors criticized his emphasis on outlet for its assumption of a male norm of sexuality, but the measure also allowed Kinsey to challenge the belief that the vaginal orgasm was the ultimate female sexual experience and to worry that women were not achieving outlet on par with men.

[^12]: Alfred C. Kinsey, *Sexual Behavior in the Human Female* (Philadelphia: Saunders, 1953), 469; Alfred C. Kinsey, *Sexual Behavior in the Human Male* (Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co., 1948), 639.

Kinsey’s work struck a chord. Published by a small medical press, the *Reports* became best-sellers. The male version (1948) sold nearly 250,000 copies and its female counterpart (1954) eventually surpassed that figure. Americans had become, in the expression of the day, “Kinsey conscious.” Kinsey himself assumed celebrity status, mentioned in Cole Porter’s “Too Darn Hot” from *Kiss Me, Kate*. The reports spurred unprecedented public talk about sex and raised questions about what was normal. Many readers indicated to Kinsey that they sought reassurance by checking his charts and graphs to determine where they fell on his scales. Other readers had more pressing concerns. Many who were haunted by urges considered unnatural sought out help from Kinsey, who often advised that conventional moral standards bore little resemblance to human needs.

The reports were exceedingly controversial. Lay critics accused Kinsey of encouraging immoral and harmful behavior. Academics concentrated primarily on his methodology and his assumptions, pointing out the peculiarities of his sample. Though he wrote about the human male and female, his data was American. Even as a measure of the United States, the data were limited. As a number of critics noted at the time, his surveys over-represented some groups (whites, middle-class women) and under-represented or excluded others (African Americans were, for reasons Kinsey never made clear, excluded from the volume on female sexual behavior). To survey lower-class men (Kinsey wanted to account for differences in status, income, and age), the report used prisons on the debatable assumption that imprisonment was part of the lower-class cultural norm. Kinsey was also selective in the acts he chose to count, ignoring not just acts that did not lead to orgasm but also group sex, sadism, masochism, and transvestism as too marginal. As Sarah Igo has pointed out, the entire project had an ironic edge in that Kinsey envisioned his statistics as necessary to prevent an individual becoming "unique and unexplainable except through an elaborate investigation of him as an isolated entity," lay the groundwork for judgments of “average” as "normal."[^13]

[^13]: Paul Robinson, *Modernization of Sex: Havelock Ellis, Alfred Kinsey, William Masters, and Virginia Johnson* (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1989), 110, 116; Sarah Elizabeth Igo, *The Averaged American: Surveys, Citizens, and the Making of a Mass Public* (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2007), 196-98.

Many who studied the mind criticized not the revelations about homosexuality or extramarital sexuality but the naturalistic assumptions that concentrated on outlet to the detriment of meaning. All the information in the reports were unlikely to help Americans find themselves, psychiatrists charged, because they had nothing to say about internal states. By ignoring the complexity of consciousness, Kinsey reduced the self to mere biological reflexes and all choice to acting on impulse. By pruning the meaning of a sexual act to release of energy, Kinsey obfuscated the uniqueness of individual sexual lives. His description of sex made no mention of relationships, the institutional context in which sex took place. “Love,” which many critics took to be the culturally sanctioned goal of sex, was absent from the Kinsey investigations. The anthropologist Ashley Montagu complained that Kinsey’s report ignored emotions altogether. The literary critic Lionel Trilling argued that Kinsey equated the natural with the good. “Although,” Trilling wrote “the Report directs the harshest language toward the idea of the Normal, saying that it has stood in the way of any true scientific knowledge of sex, it is itself by no means averse to letting the idea of the Natural develop quietly into the idea of the Normal.” That surreptitious assumption, Trilling continued, was why the Kinsey Report “has an extravagant fear of all ideas that do not seem to it to be, as it were, immediately dictated by simple physical fact.”[@trilling1950, p. 234-5] Margaret Mead charged that the report shared the faults of the culture it purported to measure, an emphasis on size, numbers, money, publicity, and sales.[^15]

[^15]: Contemporary analysis of the reports can be found in Donald Porter Geddes, *An Analysis of the Kinsey Reports on Sexual Behaviour in the Human Male and Female.* (London: F. Muller, 1954); Jerome Himelhoch, and Sylvia Fleis Fava, *Sexual Behavior in American Society: An Appraisal of the First Two Kinsey Reports* (New York: Norton, 1955); Margaret Mead, “An Anthropologist Looks at the Report,” in *Problems of Sexual Behavior* (New York: American Social Hygiene Association, 1948).

Opposition to Kinsey’s naturalism notwithstanding, many of his critics had become more receptive to crediting the biological foundations of selfhood. Both Mead and Montagu tempered the cultural relativism of their prewar and war writings. Their postwar work emphasized how the type of body one shaped and modified the impact of culture and constrained the ability of individuals to create their selves. Likewise the standards that they used to judge a given culture were less how a culture fit a people's circumstances, which had been that of their prior cultural relativism, than how well it conformed to certain givens. Their culturalism did not vanish, but it was muted. Nowhere was this more apparent in discussions of gendering.

Born Israel Ehrenberg in London in 1905, Montagu had begun his career by challenging the coherence of the concept of race in *Man’s Most Dangerous Myth: The Fallacy of Race* (1942). Race was not, he argued, rooted in distinctive biological differences since variation within racial groups was as great as among them. Nor did physical markers dictate mental or moral differences. In his draft of the UNESCO statement on race in 1950, Montagu drew on the vitalist biology of the anarchist Petr Kropotkin to insist on a common human nature formed by a biological drive for cooperation. His denial of mental and temperamental differences provoked scholarly criticism for his tendency to overgeneralize from limited evidence. It also led to attacks for alleged Communism, which cost him a position at Rutgers. Carving out a niche for himself as a public expert, he turned his attention to sex differences with *The Natural Superiority of Women* (1953).

Women, Montagu asserted, were naturally healthier and more intelligent than men, which were qualities that followed from their inclination for cooperation. Most importantly women benefitted psychologically from their physical closeness to children. Montagu’s argument posited an ironclad linkage between biological attributes and social role, which in turn created the valuable components of culture. Montagu envisioned women as the agents of cooperation, altruism and love. “*It is the function of women to teach men how to be human*,” he declared. Women’s biological makeup better suited them for bolstering human relations than for engaging in competitive or solitary pursuits. Given his cooperative ethos, Montagu emphasized female nurturing to give anthropological imprimatur to the gender divisions of American democracy. “It is not for nothing,” he continued in defense of a division of functions, “that the Bolsheviks attempted to abolished the family and masculinize women, while the Nazis made informers of children against their parents, and put the State so much before the family that it became a behemoth that well-nigh destroyed everyone who was victimized by it.”[@montagu1953, p. 143, 147 Emphasis in the original.] Although sometimes regarded as a precursor of modern feminism because of his praise of female intelligence, creativity and fellow feeling, Montagu was not so much urging a redistribution of power or pointing to new possibilities for the female self as consigning women to set roles. It was, the feminist Eve Merriam wrote, a left-handed compliment from someone whose pre-eminent position enabled such generosity.[@merriam1964, p. 187]

Mead might have made an even sharper biological turn. In 1958, Mead’s interest in biology as a factor in personality development had progressed to the point that she hired Barbara Heath, Sheldon’s former assistant, to do somatotypes in Papua New Guinea. By the early 1960s, she had found some affinity with Konrad Lorenz, the Austrian ethologist whose work on imprinting and on aggression articulated perhaps the most prominent version of biological influence on formation of the self. Her postwar consideration of the biological determinants of self began with her *Male and Female* (1949). Mead argued that biological divide between male and female was not limited to the obvious differences in sexual organs and role in reproduction. She discerned contrasts in energy, attention, perception, and initiative. She also insisted that the female self, whatever else it accomplished, was inextricably engaged with the emotional development of children since its body was the generator of mother love.

That anatomical differences generated different selves represented a change in emphasis from Mead’s earlier work. *Coming of Age in Samoa* (1928) and *Sex and Temperament in Three Primitive Societies* (1935) stressed human flexibility and plasticity in sexual orientations, character traits, and role; *Male and Female* emphasized the universality of division and the limits on plasticity. Mead not only emphasized the split between the sexes in child birth and rearing but further contended that biological differences were at the base of all cultures. All cultures, she insisted, parceled out typical cultural traits along sexual lines. Crucially, however, cultures did not separate male and female in the same ways. There were, Mead argued, no personality traits that were exclusively male or female. Different cultures regarded beauty, intelligence, kindness, or friendliness in different ways. Bravery was not solely a male trait; women had no monopoly on cooperation. The spectrum of gender traits led Mead to declare that rigid gender roles were responsible for much “inequality and waste in the world.”[@mead1949]

Squaring her recognition of biological difference with her hope for a more flexible expectations of women's personalities took some doing. As with her earlier work, *Male and Female* was both field research report and cultural criticism of the United States. She continued to criticize prudery about somatic functions (including sexual desire) and its inversion, the excessive eroticization of bodies. Both prudery and eroticization inhibited the ability of Americans to feel at home in their own bodies(p. 141). Mead was especially critical of the withdrawal of fathers from parenting responsibilities. Ironically it was American mothers who reminded boys to act like men. Absent fathers, Mead observed, demonstrated that America did not have a "women" problem but one of gender relations. "As surely as we believe that the present troublesome problems of sex adjustment are due to the position of women alone we commit ourselves to a long series of false moves as we attempt to push women out of the home, into the home, out of the home, adding mounting confusion of the difficulties born of a changing world . . . ”(pp. 299-301). Few moves were false as foreclosing the play of gender qualities.

Mead's talk of flexibility in gender relations made *Male and Female* different from different from the widely circulated anti-feminist tract *Modern Woman: The Lost Sex* (1947) by Ferdinand Lundberg and Marynia Farnham, despite their common  insistence on female docility and the essential nature of mother love. Lundberg and Farnham's screed excoriated American women for their unnatural abandonment of motherhood and domestic life -- two roles for which they were suited. Influenced by the feminist movement and war-time employment, American women no longer found satisfaction in child-bearing. As mothers, they tended to be rejecting, overprotective, domineering, or over-affectionate. Any of the four types were responsible neurotic and unhappy children, which Lundberg and Farnham estimated constituted one fourth to one third of the population.[@lundberg1947]

Lundberg and Farnham small part of a larger conversation of the meaning and applicability of Freud. A more pitched debate took place between orthodox and neo-Freudians over the degree to which social institutions could shape, change, or cancel bodily impulses. Freud’s understanding of the formation of the self had matured over the course of his career, but a fairly constant portion was libido theory. In it, Freud held that *trieb* (alternatively translated as “drives” or “instinct”) were fundamentally sexual in nature. The energy focuses on different zones at different moments in an individual’s childhood. Should it become fixated on certain parts, psychopathology would arise. Drives are relentless and fundamentally antisocial, leading to efforts to regulate them. This regulation could be conscious (suppression), unconscious (repression through internalization of social prohibitions and norms), or channeled (sublimation). Freud envisioned the individual as continually at odds with him or herself, yet capable of some forms of psychic health by using the energy of the drives for work and love.[See, among others, Robert Waelder, *Basic Theory of Psychoanalysis* (New York: Shocken Books, 1960); @lear2005; and @sulloway1979]

Although revisionists accepted Freud’s notion of a depth psychology in which unconscious motivation--retrievable through dreams, fantasies, and slips--accounted for external behavior, they rejected the libido theory. Such analysts as Erik Erikson, Karen Horney, Harry Stack Sullivan, and Erich Fromm challenged the exclusive concentration on the erotic, Freud’s hydraulic conception of energy that limited the amount available to an individual, and the orthodox assertion of the universality of Oedipal conflict. Revisionists charged that empirical evidence was lacking for all these propositions. Others criticized Freud’s version of female sexuality in which girls transfer desire from mother to father and yearn for a penis as incoherent. At bottom, they objected to a view of biological endowment as unalterable and proposed instead a view in which the self under the impress of nature and society was more variable, dynamic, and contingent.[^22]

[^22]: See Erich Fromm and Rainer Funk, *Beyond Freud: From Individual to Social Psychoanalysis* (Riverdale, NY: American Mental Health Foundation Books, 2010); Karen Horney, *The Neurotic Personality of Our Time* (New York: Norton, 1937); and Harry Stack Sullivan, *The Interpersonal Theory of Psychiatry* (New York: Norton, 1953).

With its emphasis on social context rather than biologically-based drives, revisionism opened the possibility of connecting psychological development to political change. Most notable in this regard was Erich Fromm, who discerned commonalities between Freud and Marx. “Different as they were, they have in common an uncompromising will to liberate man, an equally uncompromising faith in truth as the instrument of liberation and the belief that the condition for this liberation lies in man's capacity to break the chain of illusion.”[@fromm1962, p. 18] In Fromm’s synthesis, dynamic psychology provided the mechanism by which social existence gave rise to consciousness while historical materialism contributed an etiology to why certain character types predominated at different times in human history. Fromm believed libidinal theory could not convincingly explain why a particular social class featured a particular character type. It was unlikely, he thought, that every petit bourgeois had anal fixations. If the human instinctual apparatus was not infinitely malleable, it nonetheless changed in response to the historical problems it faced. Fromm’s revisionism was most apparent in his view of the family as the conduit of historical context through the particular bodily and psychic gratification structure. As long as it bestowed the proper rewards, the family would give rise to the typical character type. Should families cease to deliver rewards, the stage was set for new character types and social change.[@friedman2013]

If Fromm jettisoned orthodoxy for radical ends, others hewed to it for similar reasons. Although the analytic establishment used Freud to secure patient adjustment to normal social life, thinkers diverse as Herbert Marcuse, Lionel Trilling, and the sociologist Dennis Wrong glimpsed in Freudian libido theory the possibility of true opposition to the political and social status quo. They held that the drives did *not* set the self forever but opened possibilities for overturning social convention. Revisionists had treated nature as a form of determinism, but their work relied on what Wrong termed the oversocialized conception of man (sic). By positing social and cultural causation activated by an ingrained need for approval, revisionism turned out at bottom to be a theory of conformity in which rebels were incompletely socialized.[@wrong1961] Freud himself was dismissive of social revolution, but his conception of the self caught between drive and internalized social restriction was a portrait of a person in struggle. For defenders of libido theory, that struggle could result in the redirection of instincts for  nonconformist ends. Literary critic Lionel Trilling valued Freud for his portrait of the self bathed in but struggling against culture. The various biological imperatives enabled the Freudian self to move beyond conformity and an all-controlling culture, especially if the culture demanded reasonableness and uniformity of manner as was the case for postwar America. That biology could underwrite a different kind of conformity was less worrying to Trilling in the 1950s when culture seemed so demanding than it was to the neo-Freudians and it would be to subsequent liberals. [@trilling1955, particularly 38-58]

Trilling included Freud's death drive, which posited humans tendency toward stasis and even destruction, as part of humanity's biological equipment. That drive ruled out Utopian visions. On this point the Marxist philosopher Marcuse demurred, reckoning that the unleashing of eros would break down capitalist society’s conversion of sex energy into alienated labor. “The irreconcilable conflict is not between work (reality principle) and Eros (pleasure principle), but between alienated labour (performance principle) and Eros,” Marcuse proclaimed.[@marcuse1955, p. 47] Marcuse's celebration of Eros to the exclusion of reason led him to flirt with the non-Marxist position that bodily pleasure was the sole measure of meaningful selfhood. Only later did he realize the degree to which American culture might co-opt the supposedly liberating aspects of instinctual life. That realization resulted in his famous concept of repressive sublimation in *One-Dimensional Man* (1964), which maintained that by allowing, encouraging, and commodifying instant gratification, capitalist society drained energies that could be used in opposition and bolster the prevailing order.

Although most debate revolved around how the body determined identity, there were instances where self and body became unconnected and revealed how plastic gender behavior could be. Some were played for fun, as in Billy Wilder’s film *Some Like It Hot* (1959), in which Jack Lemmon and Tony Curtis dress and live as women to escape gangsters. Others, such as the case of Christine Jorgensen went to the heart of body and identity. Although born with a penis, George William Jorgensen felt early on as a child that she was a woman trapped in a man’s body. Although psychoanalysts regarded such a condition as a mental illness, the result of improper identification with the properly sexed parent during early childhood, medical doctors regarded the condition as inadequate physical development of the proper sexual characteristics. Beginning hormone therapy with the husband of a classmate, Jorgensen traveled to Europe to have sex reassignment surgery which she completed in Denmark in 1951 and 1952. Jorgensen became an instant celebrity upon her return to the United States. Often an object of derisive humor, Jorgensen responded by adopting a glamorous and outgoing persona, quite different from her diffidence as a boy. Forbidden from marrying (her birth certificate indicated she was male), she nonetheless by her very existence demonstrated that gender was not a binary, incommensurate condition and that genitalia and chromosomes alone did not provide a completely solid foundation for identity.[@jorgensen2000; @meyerowitz2002]



### The Crowd and the Lonely



Midcentury Americans were inveterate joiners. Such organizations as the Boy Scouts, Parent-Teachers Association and the League of Women Voters experienced tremendous growth from 1950 to 1960, virtually doubling during the period. Even some sales unfolded in a group environment. The much-derided Tupperware---plastic covered dishes intended to store leftovers ---was founded in 1948 and rose to cultural prominence and lucrative returns on the strength of its marketing through “Tupperware parties” of friends and neighbors. Many commentators complained about the pressure to belong and conform and the suspicion that attached to outsiders and loners. Yet observers also claimed the connections of bowling leagues and other civil society groups were particularly thin and unfulfilling. Americans, they observed, had no real connections and felt meaningless and alone. In many ways, these seemingly opposite complaints were two sides of the same coin, the inability American life to derive a productive relationship between individuals and society.

Although there is very little discussion of loneliness as the term is usually understood, David Riesman’s *Lonely Crowd* (1950) takes as its central problem the changing relationship of the self and others. Riesman developed an interest in sociology during his analysis with Erich Fromm. Originally, he and his associates Reuel Denney and Nathan Glazer set out to investigate apathy during the 1948 presidential election, but turned to a study of the history of character. What they found was that the United States was in the midst of a change in the predominant character type. During the pioneer stage of economic development, the modal American was inner directed. As the name suggests, the type acted in accord with an internalized code and took its identity from work accomplishments. With the rise of bureaucracy and mass communications, an emergent type -- the other directed -- gained traction. Other-directed people took their cues from social expectations and the reactions of their fellows and organized their self-conception around leisure and consumption. Where the inner-directed experienced guilt for violating the code, the other directed underwent anxiety over whether they would win approval.

Many readers interpreted Riesman’s book as deploring the rise of the other-directed personality, which they saw as conformist, insecure, and dependent. They regarded his portrait of the inner-directed man as an elegy for a world in which assuredness and ambition were paramount. Work groups, many bemoaned, had no room for such people. A 1954 *Time* magazine cover reinforced the impression. It featured a man in a business suit with a radar transmitter on his back looking to the future and the Victorian figure with a compass moving back into the mists of the past while the faceless masses congregated behind the bespectacled Riesman, whom the story itself depicted as well-adjusted and social.[^28] Riesman denied he was simply lamenting the decline of nineteenth-century individualism or criticizing conformity as such. Riesman was clear that the issue was *how*, not whether, a society induces conformity. Nineteenth-century America did so through a similar internal code that resulted in envy and emulation among inner-directed strivers. Nor did he think the inner-directed personality was particularly admirable, pointing to its constricted and parochial nature. The inner-directed man may have had his internal code, but the circle of others whom he accepted was quite small and his inner censor could be unproductively unforgiving. Inner direction may have suited the class-conflict ridden stage of capitalism but was hardly the model for personal freedom in the modern age.[^29]

Often ignored in the interpretation of the book was Riesman's consideration of the virtues of other-direction. The other-directed, he noted, conformed from an “greater resonance with others, a heightened self-consciousness about relations to people, and a widening of the circle with whom one wants to feel in touch.” The other-directed self was aware of others and had the capacity to be more empathetic, sensitive, tolerant, and flexible. Riesman contended that the other-directed were more prone to examining inner life and better suited to a world in which work had been so degraded that it could no longer contribute to a worthwhile identity.[^30]

[^28]: Eric Larrabee, “David Riesman and His Readers,” in [@lipset1961, 404-16] and Wilfred M. McClay, “The strange career of *The Lonely Crowd*: or, the antimonies of autonomy" in [@haskell1993, p. 397-440]. [@ehrenreich1983, p. 35] makes a compelling case that concern over other-direction was also a concern about the feminization of the work force.

[^29]: David Riesman, *The Lonely Crowd: A Study of the Changing American Character* (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1952), xiv. See 13-6, 87-95, 109-125, 159-60 for a discussion of inner-direction.

[^30]: Riesman addresses other-directed on 19-24 31-36, 96-108, 126-160.

Yet there were grounds in *Lonely Crowd* for the lament interpretation, as Riesman later conceded in follow ups.[@riesman1954; @riesman1990; @mclaughlin2001] Other-direction enabled insincere glad-handing and mood engineering designed to influence vaguely discomforted individuals uncertain about whether or not they fit in. Because they drew identity from consumption rather than work, other-directeds were especially vulnerable to swings in fashion. Like Arthur Miller’s Willie Loman in *Death of a Salesman* (1949), other-directeds were often convinced they had “sterling traits of character” and “a pleasing personality” and often found it difficult to face reality. Riesman was aware as well that impression management could work its way from business to family and school and that an other-directed society could be characterized by "false personalization" in which the boundaries between the personal and the public erode, and widespread inauthenticity. Further investigations of coteries of college students revealed that those with group orientations did not reliably care about others' well being, as Riesman posited they would.

The most tantalizing but least realized portion of the book was Riesman’s discussion of autonomy. Riesman believed that since the problem of production had been virtually solved, freedom was a psychosocial rather than a material challenge. Although Riesman had noted in a letter to Denney the possibility that in some circumstances alienation could be a legitimate response to a society that bore down too heavily on individuals, he ultimately tended to regard the condition as anomie, the breakdown of social connection and norms. More preferable was autonomy, which he conceded was relatively rare, especially in a regime of outer-direction. He envisioned autonomy achieved through membership in multiple communities, creative consumption by which he meant knowledgeable use of an item, and the ability to know and master one’s own desires. The details remained exceedingly vague. He did insist, however, that creativity amidst the general joylessness of modern life was essential. In response, Daniel Bell termed him a prophet of play who overemphasized the degree to which consumption yielded the kind of freedom that Riesman wanted. Indeed, by the late 1960s, Riesman worried that efforts to go one’s own way had become willful efforts to depart from norms for their own sake, as if eccentricity proved one was not other-directed.

Others popular sociological investigators were less subtle than Riesman. Both William Whyte and Vance Packard were deeply critical of institutional exploitation of individual's fears of being different. Whyte and Packard regarded the corporation as the nerve-center of a collectivist culture in which ostensibly free individuals abandon their individuality to insure smooth group dynamics. In such a culture "keeping up with the Joneses" stemmed less from a desire for material improvement than a hope for psychic relief. Whyte termed the phenomenon “groupthink,” the conscious justification for conformity on the grounds that group wisdom was superior to that of individuals. With “groupthink” came personality transformation. "Groupthink" flowed from the cubicles of the corporation to the A-frames of suburbia, with, as the Malvina Reynolds' song had it, its "little boxes" made of "ticky-tacky" all in a row. The similarity of the exteriors signified the conformity inside what Betty Friedan called "a comfortable concentration camp. Packard’s criticism was directed at institutions of manipulation and standardization, such as advertising, product design, and public relations. Although influential, Packard and Whyte’s broadsides proved overstated. The suburbs, including the supposed epitome of conformity, Levittown, were much less conformist than they claimed. Nor could they offer any meaningful way to oppose conformity. The best alternative that Whyte could offer was an appendix on cheating on personality tests.[^32]

[^32]: See [@horowitz1994]. Lewis Coser, “Kitsch Sociology” *Partisan Review* (Summer 1959): 480-3 criticizes Packard's work. Herbert J. Gans, *The Levittowners: Ways of Life and Politics in a New Suburban Community* (New York: Institute of Urban Studies, Teachers College, Columbia University, 1965) challenges the belief in suburban conformity. Whyte’s guide to cheating on personality tests is the Appendix to *The Organization Man*, 405-10.

Whyte and Packard’s lament for the autonomous self resistant to social pressure was echoed in the popular film genre that enjoyed something of a heyday in midcentury, the Western. The typical 1950s Western probed the social and cultural conflict that arose when rugged individualism lost its social utility. At odds with the direction of history, Western heroes constantly drift or die. Ostensibly a celebration of the lone hero's self-assuredness and unshakeable determination, midcentury Westerns have a melancholic feel. Heroic bold action ends with complete alienation from the community. John Wayne’s Tom in Howard Hawks’s *Red River* (1948) is a rugged individualist par excellence who demands others bend to his will. He regards others’ needs as a personal attack and treats compromise as weakness. During a crucial cattle drive, his violent and inhumane behavior boils over in a mutiny led by his adopted son, Montgomery Clift’s Matt, whom in a reversal of the Oedipal drama Tom vows to kill. In the case of *Shane* (1953), the titular character is caught between his gunslinging nature and his desire to put his past away. When a cattle baron and his henchmen attempt to engross the fertile land of the valley, threatening the farm family where Shane works and boards, he abandons his pledge, killing the treacherous baron and his hired guns in a showdown. Though the young boy who idolizes him wants Shane to “come back,” Shane intuitively understands the impossibility of a self like his living peaceably with others, even as his skills constitute a precondition for society. In *High Noon* (1952) the incompatibility lies in the unprincipled conformity of those who compose respectful society. Hearing that a criminal, whom he had put away in jail was returning to exact his revenge, sheriff Will Kane (Gary Cooper) feels it incumbent to stand his ground, even though he was about to leave for the East with his new bride. Efforts to recruit help are unavailing and Kane faces the onslaught alone (with the help of his Quaker wife). Often taken as an allegory for Hollywood cravenness in the face of HUAC threats, the film earned praise for Kane’s doing what was right when others would not.[^33]

[^33]:	John G. Cawelti, *The Six-Gun Mystique* (Bowling Green, Ohio: Bowling Green State University Popular Press, 1984); Richard Slotkin, _Gunfighter Nation: The Myth of the Frontier in Twentieth-Century America_ (Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1998).

Placing the western in the present day only exacerbated the incongruity of the autonomous hero. In *Lonely Are the Brave* (1962), written by the once-blacklisted Dalton Trumbo from eco-anarchist Edward Abbey’s novel *The Brave Cowboy*, loner Jack Burns (Kirk Douglas) proves unable to function in modernity. The film drives the point home from the beginning where Burns at home on the range is discombobulated by screaming jets, gear-shifting trucks that make highway crossings on a horse nearly impossible, and barbed-wire fences that block free passage. Burns makes to trek from the New Mexico mountains to free his friend Paul, who has been jailed for smuggling Mexican refugees into the country. Once in town, Burns sets out to get arrested so he can break Paul out of jail with hacksaw blades he has smuggled into the prison. When family man Paul decides the costs of jail break are greater than doing the time, Burns escapes by himself. Chased by the forces of law and order with its radios and helicopters up the Sandia Mountains, Burns temporarily manages to evade capture, even shooting down a copter. Yet in the midst of trying to cross a highway, his horse once again spooks and Burns is hit by a truck carrying, in an excess of symbolism, a load of toilets.

Douglas secured the rights and hired Trumbo to tell a story about the near impossibility of maintaining authentic individuality in a mass society bent on classifying and regulating its citizens. Burns has no ID cards because he knows who he is. He rejects fences and no trespassing signs because they represent society’s encroachment on his freedom. Director David Miller reinforced the point visually by showing the mountains and deserts of New Mexico in panoramic shots that emphasized the openness and freedom of nature and shooting the machinery and enclosed rooms of civilized society in claustrophobic closeups. In the end, of course, modern civilization would prove triumphant and doom folks like Burns. Yet Trumbo punctuated the requiem for the independent self with a caveat. Burns tells Jerry, Paul’s wife, with whom he was once in love that he was unfit for marriage, “Know what a loner is? He's a born cripple. He's a cripple because the only person he can live with is himself. It's his life, the way he wants to live. It's all for him. A guy like that, he'd kill a woman like you. Because he couldn't love you, not the way you are loved.” Such a scene can be read as an equation of solitude with selfishness. It might also be understood as a reaffirmation of gender differences: only men have the wherewithal to live as they want to live.

Another, less conventional, version of authentic individuality free from social constraints arrived via the Beats, the best-known midcentury bohemians. Convinced that normal American life demanded sterile routines that denied individuals genuine freedom, the motley collection of writers, poets, and artists stridently asserted their rejection of social norms that, by their lights, repressed impulses, outlawed meaningful experience, and demanded standardization of thought, feeling, and action. In reaction to a society that was overly sentimental and inauthentic, Beats adopted an attitude of cool, a reserved distance from established ways.[@dinerstein2017] In contrast to middle-class norms of restraint and caution, Beats favored spontaneity. In protest of the mainstream insistence on propriety, Beats embraced the margins of society, seeking out the company of criminals, drugs addicts, deviants, and denigrated minorities. Jack Kerouac gave expression to the Beat posture when he had Sal Paradise, the narrator of his 1957 novel, *On the Road*, declare “the only people for me are the mad ones, the ones who are mad to live, mad talk, mad to be saved, desirous of everything at the same time, the ones that never yawn or say a commonplace thing, but burn, burn, burn” and celebrate the black community of Denver because “the best the white world had offered was not enough ecstasy for me, not enough life, joy, kicks, darkness, music, not enough night.”[^34]

[^34]:	Jack Kerouac, *On the Road.* (New York: Viking Press, 1957), 8,180.

Most unsympathetic commentators regarded Beats as conformist in their nonconformity and engaged in a juvenile reaction against adulthood. Writing in the *Partisan* Review, Norman Podhoretz lambasted their worship of primitive energy: “The plain truth is that the primitivism of the Beat Generation serves first of all as a cover for an anti-intellectualism so bitter that it makes the ordinary American’s hatred of eggheads seem positively benign.”[^35] Others rightly criticized their racial stereotyping in the guise of admiration and their blatant misogyny. In many respects, however, the Beats were less distant from the mainstream than it first appeared. In their search for authenticity free from social boundaries and expectations, they captured, albeit in an unusual form, the postwar worries about groupism crushing independent selfhood. Most Americans did not, of course, have affinity for madness, Eastern religion, or the mysticism of William Blake. Nor did stand ready as did the Beats to jettison the self altogether as William Burroughs did when he observed that the Beats needed to learn “to exist with no religion, no country, no allies” and “to live alone in silence.”[^36] Many Americans did, however, share a sense that avenues for authentic selfhood were somehow impaired, even if they did not hit the road or reject white-collar careers.

[^35]: Norman Podhoretz, “The Know-Nothing Bohemians,” *Partisan Review* XXV (1958), 313.

[^36]: Burroughs in *The Job: Interviews with William Burroughs by Daniel Odier* (New York: Penguin, [1969] 1989, p.35.

Beat spontaneity did not result in a consistent philosophy. More philosophically sophisticated in its consideration of the meaning and dilemmas of identity was existentialism. Although as historian George Cotkin has argued several strains of American thought had existential themes, the philosophy did not take hold until European versions arrived in mid-twentieth century. The thought of Soren Kierkegaard, introduced through the efforts of neo-Orthodox Episcopal minister, Walter Lowrie, led figures as diverse as Reinhold Niebuhr, Will Herberg, Whitaker Chambers, and Arthur Schlesinger, Junior to temper or reject their one-time expansive hopes for social transformation. Existentialism gathered steam with the New York intellectuals’ discovery and promotion of the French writers, Jean-Paul Sartre, Simone de Beauvoir and Albert Camus in the mid-1940s, but all three had unsatisfactory visits to United States. Their hosts criticized the existentialists for their flirtation with Marxism (Camus being an exception), shallow knowledge of Freud, and mass-media posturing. Nonetheless existentialism remained attractive as a philosophy of authenticity that enjoined individuals not to accept fate but instead create their identities as singular, unique beings. More than the pose of Greenwich Village coffeehouse habitués, existentialism proved a bracing challenge and support for those searching for an understanding of where they stood in the world. One sign of its success was the appearance of such academic efforts to provide meaningful genealogies and commentary as Hazel Barnes’s *The Literature of Possibility* (1957) and Walter Kaufmann’s *Existentialism From Dostoevsky to Sartre* (1956). By the mid-1960s, existentialism had profoundly affected the novelists Anne Rice and Marge Piercy, the feminist Roxanne Dunbar-Ortiz, and radicals Tom Hayden and Robert Moses, and, ironically, given their opposing sexual politics, Betty Friedan and Norman Mailer.[^38]

[^38]:	George Cotkin, *Existential America* (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2003), 91-158; Hazel E. Barnes, *An Existentialist Ethics* (New York: Knopf, 1967); Hazel E. Barnes, *The Literature of Possibility: A Study in Humanistic Existentialism* (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1959); Walter Kaufmann, *Existentialism From Dostoevsky to Sartre* (New York: Meridian Books, 1956).

Existentialism defined the human condition as strikingly individual. Though humans live in groups, our consciousness and our death were ours alone. Where determinisms wrongly subsumed particulars under abstract and ultimately meaningless concepts, existentialism stressed contingencies and countered that truths were made, not discovered. At the core of things was the necessity of human choice. It was the inescapability of making choices and creating an identity that gave meaning to the famous Sartrean aphorism that existence precedes essence.[^39] Many of those choices were crucial ones that could not be fudged and committed an individual to a particular course, “either/or” in the parlance rather than “both/and.” Even though the world was absurd in the sense that meaning was not given, having to make a choice conferred a seriousness to life and required individuals to assume responsibility for whom one was and whom one became. One could not evade the responsibility of choice even if one occupied a lowly social position or suffered through oppressive conditions. That was the nub of Camus's “Myth of Sisyphus.” Condemned to the absurdity of forever pushing a boulder up a mountain, Sisyphus nonetheless differed from the inhuman boulder because he retained the ability to deny fate and make deliberate choices about what he would do. Sartre labeled bad faith any denial of responsibility for one’s situation. It was inauthentic to simply shrug one’s shoulders and assert this is just the way I am. Borrowing from phenomenological discussion of consciousness, Sartre asserted resignation denied our awareness, however dim and distant, that we are always more than ourselves. Existentialists insisted there was no greater inauthenticity than accepting  social conventions without passionate engagement and choice.[^40]

[^39]: Jean Paul Sartre, "Existentialism is a Humanism," translated by Carol Macomber ; introduction by Annie Cohen-Solal ; notes and preface by Arlette Elkaïm-Sartre ; edited by John Kulka (New Haven: Yale University Press, [1945] 2007, vii )

[^40]: [@camus1955]. [@sartre1967, p. 147-186] serves as primer for Sartre's views on bad faith.

Although Sartre once wrote “hell is other people,” existentialists were wary of blithe libertarianism and the egoism of exclusive self regard. Having condemned the bad faith of acquiescing in a socially-imposed identity, existentialists also challenged the bad faith of pretending antecedent conditions had no effect whatsoever, as if all things were possible. One of those antecedent conditions that the French recognized was society itself. That recognition gave the politics of the existentialists social concerns. For de Beauvoir, authenticity required an open future which extends itself by opening the freedom of others. It also presented Sartre and de Beauvoir with the task of finding a way that the individual freedom of existentialism expounded in “Existentialism is Humanism” was in line with the social causation of Marxism. Sartre’s effort to weave together collective and individual action in *The Critique of Dialectical Reason* was at best only partially successful.

The liberal Camus regarded that project as utopian politics because it treated class as an abstraction and justified positions on the grounds of historical necessity. Doing so necessarily drained values from political action and substituted revolutionary fervor for regard for others. Concerned to keep means and ends in balance, Camus opted for a reformist politics that accepted in some fashion the positions of others. That stance could flounder on the search for an unachievable middle position, as was the case with his untenable hope that the Algerian crisis could be resolved by a compromise in which French nationals kept their unique place in the colony while honoring the desire of indigenous Algerians for independence. Camus nonetheless proved tremendously inspiring for Americans eager for a new politics that combined the individual authenticity of social opposition with an acceptance of legitimate social bonds. His influence could be found in such documents of the New Left as *The Port Huron Statement* and *Liberation* magazine. That influence can be found in the former's insistence that "The goal of man and society should be human independence: a concern not with image of popularity but with finding a meaning in life that is personally authentic; a quality of mind not compulsively driven by a sense of powerlessness, nor one which unthinkingly adopts status values, nor one which represses all threats to its habits, but one which has full, spontaneous access to present and past experiences, one which easily unites the fragmented parts of personal history, one which openly faces problems which are troubling and unresolved; one with an intuitive awareness of possibilities, an active sense of curiosity, an ability and willingness to learn."[^41]

[^41]: Students for a Democratic Society, *Port Huron Statement* (Chicago: Charles H. Kerr, [1962] 1990 ), 11-12.

Worry over the legitimacy of social bonds accounted for the constant talk about alienation and the near ubiquity of the phrase “failure to communicate.” It surfaced as well in the widespread prominence of the theme of loneliness in postwar discourse. Artwork as diverse as Nicholas Ray’s *In a Lonely Place* (1950), Hank Williams’s “I’m So Lonesome I Could Cry” (1949), H. J. J. Straelen’s introduction to existentialism, *Man, the Lonely* (1952), Dorothy Day's autobiography, *The Long Loneliness* (1952), Chester Himes’s *Lonely Crusade* (1947), Margaret Wood’s social psychological exploration, *Paths to Loneliness* (1953), and Clark Moustakas’s psychological cum philosophical investigation of *Loneliness* (1961) raised the question of how to make meaningful connections in an age of impersonality. Such concerns contributed to a new meaning for the word “lonely.” Previous generations had understood the term to mean feelings arising from being physically alone, the consequence of being friendless or losing a loved one. They regarded the condition as an inescapable part of life. After the war, the term also came to signify feelings of insufficient or unrewarding social connections, feelings that were liable to arise at any moment or with any interaction. Modern loneliness implied something askew in social relations or something lacking in the kinds of people produced by such relations. “Only connect,” E. M. Forester wrote in *Howard’s End* but many worried that connection was simply not possible in American life as currently constituted.

No one at midcentury did a more thorough job of showing the contrast between ideals of togetherness and the less palatable truths of American life than photographer Robert Frank (1924 - ). His *Americans* (1958), criticized at the time for being politically unacceptable and aesthetically bankrupt, has taken on iconic status since. Born to a Swiss Jewish family, Frank came to United States in 1947, working first as a fashion photographer. With the help of famed photographer Walker Evans, Frank won a Guggenheim Fellowship in 1955 to photograph wide swathes of American life. Traveling from coast to coast over the course of two years, Frank took some 28,000 shots of which eighty-three were eventually published in the book. Initially unable to find an American publisher primarily because of his departure from prevailing norms in focus and lighting, Frank succeeded with the French publisher Robert Delpire in 1958 before landing with Grove Press in the United States the following year. Aiding Grove Press’s decision was the introduction provided by Jack Kerouac, who praised for Frank for having “sucked a sad poem right out of America onto film, taking rank among the tragic poets of the world.”[^42] Within the next three years, he had major shows at the Chicago Art Institute and the Museum of Modern Art.

[^42]:	Jack Kerouac, “Introduction” to Robert Frank, *The Americans* (New York: Grove Press, 1959), vi.

Frank’s aesthetic choices underwrote his thematic ones. His sense that the United States was a lonely, often bleak place stemmed not simply from his experiences but his long-standing opposition to sentimentality and beauty in art as false. He fretted that beauty obscured broader social implications, holding that perfect composition would make it less likely that the viewer would move beyond the frame. In contrast to professional photographers, Frank preferred blurred, grainy, and muddy exposures that he believed opened access to the underlying forces and truth of a situation. Frank rejected lighting that directed viewers to the expressive features of common humanity, opting instead to capture Americans with blank or tormented looks. In his pictures of sparsely populated bars, marching bands in which instruments obscure musicians’ faces, and automobile drivers and passengers unusually cropped to give the impression of unknown destinations and separation from the environments, Frank put a punctuation point on his sense of the desolation of American life.[^43]

[^43]:	Jonathan Green, *American Photography: A Critical History 1945 to the Present* (New York: H.N. Abrams, 1984).

Americans’ inability to connect with one another was especially clear in two of his downtown New Orleans photographs. The first captures pedestrians trying to make their way, only to find themselves impeded by a stream heading the other way. Like particles in Brownian motion, they collide, streaming this way and that. All in caught in grim and unsmiling profile. No one is looking at anyone else (one person is taking a wary glance at us, the audience). Some are looking down. Together they create a mass that extends the entire width of the frame. Determined to move onward, they appear to have neither connection with anyone else despite the claustrophobic quality of the image nor apparent destination—a graphic representation of a lonely crowd. The second, more iconic image captures the agonies of urban segregation. The photo, which graced the original cover, was entitled “Trolley New Orleans.” In typical Southern fashion, whites sit in the front and blacks in the rear. All passengers are looking out at us with varying emotions, ranging from contempt or dismissal from the white woman in the second row to anguish on the face of the black man two rows behind her. It is clearly a warm day since the windows are opened. The raised windows distort the reflection from the street and we can make out what might be apartment buildings, bridges, or pedestrians. Whatever they are, they shimmer like mirages. The open windows create an impression of cells in which each of the passengers is sealed off from his or her fellows, an effect driven home by the longing in their looks and the glistening jambs.

Frank did not arrange his photos in chronological order. Nor did he set out to tell a particular story. He did, however, have themes to which he returned --- automobiles, bars, race, and, perhaps most poignant of all, flags. Frank deployed flags not as a symbol of unity but as an unfamiliar and divisive object. In “Parade - Hoboken, New Jersey,” the flag itself serves decapitate. Rather than depicting a parade, the picture shows two apartment dwellers looking out at a parade, or so we assume. The woman in the left window is not fully visible. A white shade is partially drawn, creating a deep shadow. We are only able to make out her chin and mouth. Between the windows is an unfurled flag, blowing in the breeze. Fairly taut, it blows in such a way to make the face of the second woman invisible to us. The flag dominates the composition but it ensures Americans remain unknown to each other. The reality of division stands against the ideal of unity.

The counterpart of Frank in painting was George Tooker (1920-2011). Born in Brooklyn, trained by the famed Depression-era illustrator and chronicler of New York life, Reginald Marsh, Tooker adopted a style of figurative representation, unusual juxtapositions, bleak lighting, and ambiguous or complex perspectives, a style that he called “reality impressed on the mind so hard that it returns as a dream.” Often grouped with Edward Hopper for their common concentration on isolation, Tooker nonetheless insisted that in contrast to Hopper's realism, his paintings were fantasies or reveries of a world drained of human interaction, deep emotion and individual initiative. His figures shuffle rather than walk, and often seem isolated, imprisoned, or estranged. Typically an oppressive architecture overwhelms them, as the anonymity and standardization of modern life defines their environment. This approach dominates such works of midcentury as *The Subway* (1950), *Government Bureau* (1955-1956), and *Waiting Room* (1959). In the first, the effects of mass society in all its horror impresses itself on the viewer almost immediately. The multiple vanishing points, the confining cubicles in which numerous people wait or hide, the depressed sorrowful or blank expressions on the riders’ faces, the metal grating, all contribute to the tenor of solitary nature of alienation. Tooker claimed the subway was the epitome of “a denial of the senses and a negation of life itself.”[^44]

[^44]:	Thomas Garver, *George Tooker* (New York: Chameleon Books, 1992); http://collection.whitney.org/object/3052. Accessed March 10, 2018. See also, [@tunkl1980]

The most accomplished chronicler of loneliness in song was Frank Sintra, who created an unparalleled body of work that moved beyond predictable laments and conveyed how loneliness dissolved facades and personas to reveal the essential vulnerability of postwar life, Born in 1915, Sinatra had achieved 1940s success singing for a number of large bands, including Tommy Dorsey and Harry James. A teen idol in the mid-1940s, he hit a rough patch thereafter in which he was reduced to doing novelty songs. Released from his Columbia contract, he staged a comeback in the 1950s with an Oscar for his role in *From Here to Eternity* (1953) and sixteen albums for Capitol in which he reinvented himself as a mature, complex singer. The Capitol albums were less random collections of songs than cohesive wholes, organized around a theme or concept. Some featured the hip Sinatra, a jaunty and charming rogue with a jazz sensibility. Contrasting with the swinging Sinatra was the lonely one, who could not transcend the damages of his failed love life and went through his daily life unconnected to and unaware of others. In albums *In the Wee Small Hours* (1955), *Where are You?* (1957), *Only the Lonely* (1958)--which Sinatra called his favorite--and *No One Cares* (1959), Sinatra revealed a self crumbling under the pressure of isolation. Bolstering the effect was the album art, which portrayed a devastated Sinatra in ways few stars of his magnitude would have allowed. *Only the Lonely* featured Sinatra as a clown obscured by a black background so that only half his face is discernible and the visible part touched with red highlights on lips, nose and eyes to give the impression of a crying clown. *No One Cares* has him sitting alone and forlorn bathed in light while all around him couples socialize.[^45]

[^45]: Chris Rojek, *Frank Sinatra* (Cambridge and Malden, MA: Polity, 2004); John Rockwell, *Sinatra: An American Classic* (New York: Random House, 1984); Roger Gilbert, “The Swinger and the Loser: Sinatra, Masculinity, and Fifties Culture,” in *Frank Sinatra and Popular Culture: Essays on an American Icon*, ed. Leonard Mustazza (Westport, Conn: Praeger, 1998); Steven Petkov, “Ol’ Blue Eyes and the Golden Age of the American Song: The Capitol Years,” in *The Frank Sinatra Reader* (New York: Oxford University Press, 1995), 74-84.

Sinatra’s 1950s work subtly explored the varieties of loneliness, revealing a self insecure even when appearing confident to others. With the help of arrangers Nelson Riddle and Gordon Jenkins, Sinatra summoned a complex psychological landscape full of precariousness and disquiet. These effects owed much to Sinatra’s talents and musical intelligence. His celebrated breath control enabled him to emulate both the operatic bel canto style, which varied legato and staccato passages while frequently altering tempo, and Dorsey’s trombone virtuosity. With his flexible phrasing and accenting, Sinatra mastered a conversational style of singing that enabled him to project a variety of vulnerabilities, in contrast to the strident, even parodic, masculinity of his “swinging” albums. In fraying his voice or shifting between major and minor keys without musical resolution, Sinatra constructed a singing self that lacked poise and closure. In those cases, where the song, like an operatic recitative, lacked a real tune, Sinatra captured the midcentury despair at the inability of the self to find its center in social life.

Sinatra skillfully moved in his so-called “down” albums between gloom, resignation and disorientation. The immediate causes were failed love affairs or the inability to shake a depressed state that itself intensifies the blows that others delivered. At times reflective, at others accepting, and still others defeated, Sinatra’s songs of loneliness were a marked contrast to the bromides of national happiness and formulaic popular songs like Nelson’s that mention, not inhabit, loneliness. In “Stormy Weather” on *No One Cares*, Sinatra’s voice begins full in a lower register but as he realizes that he just can’t get his “poor self together,” his accents begin to fall irregularly. In his rendition of Rodgers’s and Hart’s “Spring is Here” on *Only the Lonely*, Sinatra achieves great effect in singing in minor key on the wrong accent when singing about moments that are normally would make one merry. One would expect that the rebirth that comes with a new season should produce a dancing heart. His confession that loneliness puts an end to ambition and desire stand is dragged out and slurred. Alienation from others is especially clear in a song that would appear at his concert well into the 1980s, “Angel Eyes.” The contrast between the happy drinking people and the singer is palpable, made all the more poignant by the change in tempo and the modulation of volume. In the beginning of the song, Sinatra is fighting against the music: it is light, he is dark. His mood prevails, however, and the celebratory tone of the music disappears. By the end, the protective coverings are stripped away and so too is the singer. As he sings, “excuse me, while I disappear.”

The problem of loneliness generated calls for adopting of cheery attitude, joining groups, and, should those fail to alleviate feelings, therapy. The tendency to treat the somber feelings that accompany being alone as a problem led a few writers to assert that not all states of aloneness were detrimental to a meaningful sense of self. Psychologist Clark Moustakas (1923-2012) maintained that reflexive flight from solitude was an effort to avoid inner life and ran the risk of self-alienation and feelings of inferiority. Those “not open enough, flexible enough, expansive enough to attach” themselves “to new personas and find value in new experiences” were frightened to face loneliness. Confronting the sense of absence provoked an “intense and timeless awareness of the Self which allows for new sensitivities and awareness, and which results in bringing a person deeply in touch with his own existence and in touch with others in a fundamental sense.”[^46] Moustakas concentrated on particularly vivid or life-changing experiences such as the sudden and severe illness of children, war injuries, the dread evoked by mountain climbing or exploring the unknown, political trials and tribulations (he mentions both Alger Hiss and Whitaker Chambers) but insisted that courting loneliness will help with quotidian living. The Catholic convert and social activist Dorothy Day (1897-1980) experienced the new self that emerged from loneliness as rebirth in religious terms. Solitude enabled her to become aware of the full extent of her sinfulness and realize that true selfhood existed in a religious community involved in the life of others.[^47] Day’s loneliness and Moustakas’ loneliness were not, it should be said, the usual experience of the time. 
 

[^46]: Clark E. Moustakas, *Loneliness* (Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, 1961), 31-2, 7.

[^47]: Dorothy Day, *The Long Loneliness: The Autobiography of Dorothy Day* (New York: Curtis Books, 1972).

### The Young and the Restless


Few discussions of the Fifties fail to mention the species known as the American teenager, identifiable by its common experience of high school and its own particular culture and behavioral repertoire. As Joseph Kett has demonstrated, before the twentieth century Americans were unaccustomed to thinking of the teen years as a distinct period devoted to experimentation and preparation for adulthood, or to assume that puberty was accompanied by emotional turbulence. The first full articulation of youth as a transitional state suspended between childhood and adulthood was the psychologist G. Stanley Hall’s *Adolescence* (1904). Hall saw the condition as one of storm and stress, marked by conflict with parents, mood swings and risky behavior. “Youth,” he wrote, “awakes to a new world and understands neither it nor himself.”[^48]

[^48]: Joseph F. Kett, *Rites of Passage: Adolescence in America, 1790 to the Present* (New York: Basic Books, 1977); Hall, quoted in Thomas Hine, *The Rise and Fall of the American Teenager* (New York, NY: Bard, 1999), 160.

Hall’s concept was the province of experts rather until the term “teenager” came into general use at midcentury. It arose primarily to demarcate a group that had enough disposable income to constitute a market segment that marketeers could exploit. In very short order, it came to signify not only Hall's storm and stress but also insecurities among peers and career uncertainties. Adults recognized American adolescents as a distinctive breed. According to a famous post-Sputnik *Life* magazine story, they were the reverse of their Soviet counterparts. Where Soviet teenagers were dedicated to their studies and committed to the success of their nation, Americans obsessed over dating, sports, and possession of the latest consumer goods. The characterization of American teenagers as consumed by the pursuit of fun, fun, fun was clearly a limited one. Not only did it obscure the threat of nuclear annihilation that haunted the future, it also defined fun in ways more typical of white, middle-class teenagers. The amusements and practices of racial minorities and working-class teenagers were often linked with juvenile delinquency.[^49]

[^49]: “School boys point up a US weakness,” *Life Magazine* (March 24, 1958), 26-35. On juvenile delinquency, see James Gilbert, *A Cycle of Outrage: America’s Reaction to the Juvenile Delinquent in the 1950s* (New York: Oxford University Press, 1986).

Adult puzzlement about teenagers stimulated numerous reports from the field in order to understand the condition. As is often the case for voyages to unknown lands, the accounts were diametrically opposed to one another. The classic conception of the teenage state was psychoanalyst Erik Erikson’s *Childhood and Society* (1951). Best known for its psychological elaboration of the concept of identity, the book melded the biological and social struggles on the road to adulthood in a way that drew upon Erikson’s training and inclinations. Born in 1902 in Frankfort, uncertain who was his father (which, biographers have speculated, accounts for his interest in identity), he migrated in 1927 to Vienna to teach at a school designed for children whose parents were in treatment with Anna Freud. At her urging, he enrolled at the Vienna Psychoanalytic Institute, where he received his diploma in 1933. Harassed by the Nazis, he and his wife Joan set sail for the United States that same year. Using his contacts in the culture and personality school of anthropologists--- Edward Sapir, Margaret Mead, Alfred Kroeber, and Ruth Benedict ---Erikson spent time observing the Sioux and the Yoruk before taking a position at the University of California. Those observations bore fruit in *Childhood and Society*’s emphasis on the culture-bound nature of personality development. Critical of efforts to enforce conformity by edict, he left the Berkeley campus in the early 1950s in protest of the requirement that faculty sign loyalty oaths.

*Childhood and Society* laid out eight stages of life, each of which linked biological development to what Erikson termed a psychosocial crisis. As individuals attempt to master the bodily functions and the corresponding life task, they encounter a set of conflicts that raise existential questions. So the initial stage of life in which the infant struggles with oral mastery and negotiates between inside and outside is rooted in the relationship with the mother and raises the question of trust. Subsequent stages involve bowel control and muscle control, which have as their life tasks negotiating the conflict between autonomy and shame and doubt and initiative and guilt respectively. Erikson’s sequence is cumulative: successful negotiation of the crisis of each stage yields rewards or “virtues.” A child who negotiates the trust - mistrust psychosocial challenge will emerge with hope. Passing through the second stage with a sense of autonomy rather than shame or doubt, for instance, bestows the virtue of will. Although Erikson posed one pole of the challenge as the optimal or desirable force, he was well aware that both were needed for healthy living. Some mistrust of others is surely warranted, as is retaining some reserves of shame and doubt. Those who could not balance psychosocial forces or interact with the outside in productive ways could, Erikson maintained, pass on to the next stage, but the residue of the unsuccessful challenge would reassert itself in problems in later life.[^50]

[^50]:	Erik H. Erikson, *Childhood and Society* (New York: Norton, 1950), 219-35.

The contrast with Freudian orthodoxy was marked. Rather than emphasize the conflicts between nature and social demands in the early years of life that endowed individuals with a characteristic stock of psychic responses, Erikson treated each stage as important in its own right. Working from the position that the ego had its own claims and was not necessarily at the mercy of the more powerful id and superego, Erikson contended that adolescence was not simply a consequence of Oedipal struggles but an important component of an ongoing process.

Given the importance Erikson assigns to the tasks of adolescence, his fifth stage, which happens between the onset of puberty and nineteen, might be the most crucial. Those that follow elaborate on the identity that first appears then. Erikson viewed the stage as a time of struggle between identity (a continuous and stable sense of one’s character, qualities, and goals) and role confusion (the inability to settle upon appropriate ways of being and achieve detente between self and society). Successful resolution of the psychosocial crisis entailed integrating memories of what one had been in the past with anticipations of what one hoped to be in the future. Easier said than done because adolescents were still uncertain of their physical and mental powers and intensely sensitive to how they appeared to others. If the task of identity is frustrated, much anti-social destructive behavior followed. As complicated as the stage could be, most adolescents do find an identity. Crucial to success was parental allowance for experimentation. Those who do open up space for a “moratorium,” Erikson advised, will generally find that their children have developed a full-blown identity in which they have reestablished boundaries and learned to negotiate a sometimes hostile world.

Although adolescence took place during a specific point in the life cycle and entailed finding identity, Erikson insisted that the content of adolescence varied from culture to culture, a point he developed further in his studies of Luther and Gandhi.[^51] Nature alone did not dictate how adolescence would be experienced or how the psychosocial conflict would be resolved. Drawing on his anthropological work, Erikson concluded that adolescence was best understood as an experiment in constituting and reconstituting fragmentary selves. Because the purpose of identity was to help individuals adapt to historical change, there was never just one successful resolution of the identity crisis but a number of reasonable ones.

The process would always be more or less tumultuous, but it need not, the European Erikson maintained, be as as severe and disorienting as it was in the United States. American adolescents were ill-equipped because their culture favored constant reinvention in the quest of singularity and American institutions were far too impermanent to guide transitions. Worried about the effects of mass society , Erikson deplored the ways incessant preparation for success resulted in a population of "overadjusted" teenagers who were prematurely pushed to a premature resolution of the psychosocial crisis. The prime purveyors of what he called the "social jungle of human existence was “Mom” (punctuation in the original), a composite, stereotypical entity who managed her children’s lives. The over-controlling, castrating mother, made famous by Phillip Wylie's *Generation of Vipers* (1942), received much criticism for building weak children during midcentury. In Erikson's version, she insisted on rigid moral behavior to help her children become independent but the actual effect was a feeling of abandonment in her children at one level and of guilt from abandoning her at another.[^52]

[^51]:	Erik H. Erikson, *Gandhi’s Truth: On the Origins of Militant Nonviolence* (New York: Norton, 1969); Erik H. Erikson, *Young Man Luther: A Study in Psychoanalysis and History.* (New York: Norton, 1958).

[^52]: [@wylie1942; Erikson, *Childhood*, 282. For a discussion of the the reasons for the "Momism" critique and an analysis of its limitations, see @plant2010]

Erikson endorsed Freud's observation that a healthy self was capable of work and love. One constant criticism of American teenagers was that they were far too obsessed with the latter. Or at least sex, a result many claimed flowed from the now familiar charge that parental supervision was too lax. Marynia Farnham advanced that argument in  *The Adolescent* (1951), which iterated her complaints against American mothers that she staked out in *Modern Woman*. Although she acknowledged American teenagers were caught between physical maturity and social prohibition, Farnham did not recommend the loosening of moral strictures (or, find avenues for sublimation) but espoused stricter supervision. The problems of youth lay with parents, she asserted, who mistakenly believe that "youngsters can make all the decisions for themselves and that uncurbed freedom is their right from birth on."[@farnham1951, p. 221] She offered little sense of the arena in which teenagers might try out identity and, in contrast to Mead, insisted that the job of supervision was that of the American wife, too many of whom "deserted the home for the supposedly more rewarding and exiting life of rivalry with men" (211).

Based on his observation of ten Chicago-area high schools, sociologist James Coleman worried if re-establishing control was even possible. In his 1961 view, American teenagers had created a counterculture. Walled off from the rest of society, Coleman's subjects so resembled one other that being a teenager outweighed differences in race, income, or geography. The culture that teenagers built was, he insisted, revolved around trivial concerns and driven by peer pressure and minute attention to the judgment of others. These other-directed personalities in training were consumers par excellence, interested only in making the proper impression at sporting events and dances. Much to Coleman’s dismay, they cared little for academic success and relegated scholars to social marginality. Teen culture, Coleman concluded, even when not openly delinquent, was incompatible with preparation for adulthood or contribution to the community.[@coleman1961]

As sociologist Bennett Berger argued in an incisive 1963 review, much of the criticism of teenagers exaggerated their separate and "countercultural" way of life. Coleman, for instance, missed a number of similarities between the teenagers that he studied and their parents. A majority of parents probably did not look at high school as solely, or even primarily, an academic venture. Teenagers' interest in cars, clothes, the opposite sex, and sports followed adults’ interest in those very same things. Berger pointed out that football, which Coleman dismissed as anti-intellectual and retrograde, served as a catalyst for community building, something academic achievement was too individualized and specialized to accomplish. Tales of juvenile delinquency and rock 'n' roll-fueled rebellion notwithstanding, American teenagers were attentive to their parents' judgments. A majority of Coleman's respondents indicated that they preferred the parent-approved Pat Boone over Elvis Presley by a wide margin and claimed that they would rather risk breaking with a friend than earning their parents’ disapproval.[^55]

[^55]: Bennett M. Berger, “Adolescence and Beyond: An Essay Review of Three Books on the Problems of Growing Up: *The Adolescent Society* by James Coleman; *Growing Up Absurd* by Paul Goodman; *The Vanishing Adolescent* by Edgar Z. Friedenberg,” *Social Problems* 10, 4 (Spring): 394-408.

Erikson’s account of identity soon became an inspiration for criticism not simply of the state of adolescence but also of the culture to which adolescences were expected to adapt. The critics whose indictments appeared in the last 1950s and early 1960s wrote with considerably more sympathy for the dilemmas of teenagers than Farnham or Coleman and were less committed to a version of the self anchored in prevailing values. The work of the professor of education Edgar Z. Friedenberg, the anarchist-Gestalt therapist Paul Goodman, and the cultural anthropologist Jules Henry opened a new chapter in writing about the American teenager in which the state of adolescence revealed the failures of American society to provide viable pathways to meaningful love and work. Their criticism of postwar adolescence was part of a larger criticism of the impoverished possibilities of self.[@friedenberg1959; @goodman2012; @henry1963].

Of the three, Friendenberg drew most directly on Erikson. He deplored that American adolescence had ceased to be a period of experimentation and true counterculture and had instead been contaminated by adult insistence that activities have socially acceptable ends. Unlike simple societies and lower-class subcultures, Friendenberg argued, intricate social organizations require an extended testing process so people develop a repertoire of responses to multifaceted expectations. A stable ego identity only develops when one sets oneself against the social order and becomes aware of “the complex, subtle, and precious difference between himself and his environment.”[@friedenberg1959, p. 13] Friedenberg controversially advocated freedom for teenagers to act as if they were young aristocrats, praising English boarding schools for providing them an arena where they could safely act self-assured. Where the English permitted “adolescents something to be adolescent about,” American children, on the other hand, were provided experiences with the appearance of adulthood but none of the difficulties or unpleasantness. Friendenberg criticized teachers, parents and those in the helping professions for suppressing all disagreements as unproductive and encouraging the bland other-directedness of superficial agreement. The "go along to get along" spirit, Friedenberg argued, robbed American teenagers of meaningful opportunities to achieve authentic self understanding.

Where Friedenberg saw adult control in service of group calm, Goodman and Henry recognized adult control in American high schools, apprentice programs, and even much recreation as preparation for the regimented work of adulthood, what Goodman called "the organized system," [See @goodman2012, Introduction] Goodman maintained that the organized system did not want youth to grow into men because men "did not suit." They were too likely to question and to demand meaning, something that ran counter to the rote and discipline necessary for most extant jobs for which teenagers were preparing. Unlike Friedenberg, Goodman traced the problem of youth to the lack of connection to social life as a whole. Adolescence in general and the school in particular was an exercise in boundary creation and impulse policing. Limited and channeled, Goodman contended, American youth were denied the chance to mold their world to their liking, a condition that prepared adolescents for routinized, meaningless work in factories and offices. For Goodman, simply rejecting the American way of growing up was insufficient. The Beats earned his disapproval for their resignation and, while understanding of delinquents’ response, he nonetheless found them too fatalistic for his liking.

Based on his observation of St. Louis area high schools, Henry viewed the discipline to which adolescents were subject as counterproductive, virtually guaranteed to coax the very responses that it ostensibly rejected. In contrast to Coleman, Henry regarded school work as unchallenging and meaningless. Studying, especially when nagged to do so by parents, made Henry’s informants feel at the will of others. Promise of vague future benefits from school work only compounded the feeling. Yet because adolescents neither developed their own standards of success nor were involved in institutions in which the standards were meaningful to their talents or aspirations, grades loomed large in their education and work life. Grading met no needs, Henry claimed, but it did accustom students to accept impersonal, standardized norms as the best metric of self-worth. For the majority, this too was a recipe for feelings of inadequacy. When one added the example of “hard-working daddies” who are “little at home and burdened with the irritations, coronaries, and ulcers of their work," it was hardly surprising to Henry that American teenagers were "id creatures," Yet even here Henry discerned a training for future life and an "adaptive radiation" of the self. Advertising and consumerism depended on the decontrol of restraint and the celebration of Id values.[^60]

[^60]: Henry, *Culture Against Man*, passim. On the role of the Id, see especially 43-44 and 127-146. On studying, 170-80.

Both Goodman and Freidenberg treat boys as the norm. They made virtually no mention of girls's problems or their futures. Women, Goodman insisted in the introduction, did not grow up absurd since they “will have children which is absolutely self-justifying, like any other natural or creative act.” Further, he went on in the introduction, the problems of teenage boys were “intensely interesting to women, for if the boys do not grow up to be men, where shall the women find men?”[^61] Henry, on the other hand, took girls' problems seriously, noting the degree to which they also experienced anxiety. Few analysts captured the silent terror and constant confusion of adolescence as adeptly as Henry. In addition to the psychological problems inherent in the conflict between biology and parental demand, Henry gauged the effects of the constant mobility of American life. Meaningful friendships, he argued, would have enabled sublimation. Lacking that stability, teenagers feel an inadequacy on the prom dance floor and automobile backseats. Parental shortcomings lay less in the absence of discipline than in failure to establish and live out meaningful lives. This inability of adults to provide ego ideals, Henry argued, created a void that peers filled. Girls were especially affected in adolescence. The difficulty lay not so much in limited goals, since beauty, fashion and popularity struck him as legitimate and meaningful pursuits, as parental goading of girls into sexual competition to snare the right husband and condemnation of those who refused to compete.[^62]

[^61]: Goodman, *Growing Up Absurd*, 21-22.

[^62]: Henry, *Culture Against Man*, 147-282, especially 149-79.

Accompanying the recognition of adolescence as a stage of life was a new form of coming-of-age expressive culture. Although it shared with earlier stories the conventions of a confused and unsettled protagonist and a distant and seemingly implacable social order, those of the mid-twentieth century departed from the models of the classic *bildungsroman* and *kunstlerroman*, which were novels of formation and growth of self. Narrated in the third person, connoting the objective truth of the situation, classic youth novels ended with the protagonists wiser and more understanding than when they began, their skills in negotiating the variability of life enhanced. Beginning their journey set against a society that seemingly had no place for them, they usually ended with a better sense of where they fit in and who they were. Their hard-won maturity enabled them to avoid repeating the mistakes of youth. Of the portrayal of adolescent crisis that were popular among subsequent generations (or at least teachers of subsequent generations), perhaps only John Knowles’s *Separate Peace* (1959) harkened back to nineteenth-century traditions of character formation.

Much postwar depictions, on the other hand, resisted conjuring up a viable or attractive version of maturity. Written in the first person or shot with a subjective camera, midcentury novels and films were statements of feeling, perceptions, and partial understandings of the narrator. Those viewpoints were partial and rarely broaden out to larger views. As titles such as *On the Road* and *Rabbit Run* indicate, postwar novels and films emphasized movement, not arrival. Their protagonists lack meaningful models and meaningful goals. The classic youth movies and novels often point to the romance of permanent adolescence. In highlighting their rejection of adult corruption and their own suffering, the teenagers of the classic postwar adolescent work of art treat their status as unique regardless of whether their acts truly warrant that designation. Even those characters whose lives are not particularly angst-ridden, like the protagonist of Saul Bellow’s picaresque novel, *The Adventures of Augie March* (1953), lack a sense of purpose and commitment. March’s tale takes him from one thing to another, from Chicago poolrooms and Mexican deserts to service in the Merchant Marine and a sketchy postwar European business career. March is optimistic rather than morose. He imagines himself a “sort of Columbus” having before him an “immediate terra incognita that spreads out in every gaze.” Yet he shares with other adolescent protagonists a lack of overarching goals, deep held commitments, or truly stable or affectionate relationships with others.

Typical of the underlying conservatism of teen movies was Nicholas Ray’s *Rebel Without a Cause* (1955), which depicts twenty-four hours in the life of troubled teenager Jim Stark. Known for James Dean’s star turn in which he combined daring, anger, pain, and an expressive adolescent inarticulateness, the movie often seemed like Farnham in Technicolor. Jim’s parents never make him face the consequences of his behavior, moving to a new school every time he has a brush with the law or fails to make friends. Much to his disgust, his parents try to dissuade him from taking responsibility for the death of a rival during a “chickie run,” a race in two stolen cars towards a cliff that is won by being the last to jump out. At the heart of Jim’s teen angst is the gender trouble all around him. His cold and demanding mother clearly dominates his father, who backs down in nearly every argument rather than live with unpleasantness. His father (Jim Backus) so clearly emasculated that he wears an apron over his suit while doing household chores (a warning sign in a period committed to an unequivocal sexual division of roles, which Ray emphasized by making it a particularly frilly full-length one). He does not, and apparently cannot, answer Jim’s constant question about what one has to do to be a man. The lack of guidance drives Jim to complain that his father just wants to be his pal and to hope his dad would haul off and hit his mother just once and set things straight. Howling after arrested for public drunkenness that his parents are tearing him apart, he concludes that no one could grow up in such a circus. He is not the only teen who has parents who fail to fulfill their proper gender roles. The father of Judy (Natalie Wood) rebuffs her efforts at affection and the father of Plato (Sal Mineo) has abandoned him entirely. Damaged, the three end in a deserted mansion where they fantasize themselves a family with quite traditional roles. After tragedy strikes with the shooting of Plato, Jim’s dad vows to be a better father, restoring the family to its proper patriarchal form and launching Jim toward maturity.

The allure of permanent adolescence was part of the long-standing appeal of J. D. Salinger's *Catcher in the Rye* (1951). The protagonist Holden Caulfield's judgmental nature, emotional volatility, and inability to form meaningful connections exemplify the traits that made teenagers fascinating and exasperating. Stung by his brother Allie's death, Holden is deeply uncomfortable with himself and finds it hard to build a genuine identity. He is a bundle of contradictions, railing against hypocrisy yet constantly lying, sometimes quite cruelly. Adulthood by its very nature disturbs and repels him. By his lights, grownups are "phonies," who act inauthentically or exhibit bad taste. Theirs in short is a world of artifice and manipulation. To escape it, Holden imagines going west and living as a deaf mute. His repulsion extends to sexuality, which he regards as an unwarranted aggression on the innocence of childhood. He takes as his calling protecting that innocence in the guise of the catcher in the rye who prevents playing children from falling off the edge of a cliff. Angered by the kids who scratch obscenities in the merry-go-round, he lacks the ego ideals that come with successful resolution of the Eriksonian conflict between identity and role confusing, envying the stasis of the Eskimos in the diorama at the Natural History museum. [^63]

[^63]: For a contrary view of Holden on the path to adulthood of a sorts, see Louis Menand, "Holden Caulfied at 50" September 24, 2001.https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2001/10/01/holden-at-fifty



Some critics have touted Sylvia Plath’s novel *The Bell Jar* (1963) as the female version of *Catcher*, and the similarities are clear. Plath’s protagonist, Esther Greenwood, shares with Holden Caulfield a profound alienation from the adult world and from herself. Like him, she judges others as inauthentic and has no sense of what she wants to be. Plath's novel is telling in its specific particular exploration of the female social world Esther's pain that it generates. Winner of a prestigious summer internship at a New York woman’s magazine, *Ladies Day*, Esther is unmoved by what other girls would have regarded as a dream chance, feeling only “still and empty”(2). Unlike her fellow interns, she rejects traditional goals. When asked what she wants to be, she can only reply that she doesn’t know. Conventional female roles repel her. She compares marriage and children rearing to being “brainwashed”: “you went about numb as a slave in some private totalitarian state” (81). Childbirth is akin to being trapped in a “long, blind, doorless and windowless corridor of pain” (62). The double standard infuriates her. She labels her boyfriend Buddy a “hypocrite” when he admits he is not a virgin and breaks off their engagement. Losing her virginity to a tall but not very good-looking mathematician in Cambridge leads to hemorrhaging and a trip to the hospital. She regards the female existence as being under a bell jar --- an image she uses to describe her own empty, airless, suspended experience but applies later to the college girls who play bridge, gossip and study.

Esther finds comfort only in abnegation of self. Where Holden aspires to be isolated or in a perpetual adolescent state, Esther struggles simply to be able to say “I am.” Her loss of self becomes so severe that she feels a zombie inside her, preventing her from speaking or writing. Her suicide attempts fail because she is convinced that her body will not obey her mind. Her treatment with an arrogant, self-absorbed male psychiatrist accelerates her efforts at self-annihilation, which almost succeed when she takes fifty sleeping pills at once in her cellar. Confined to a private hospital, she makes tenuous progress under treatment with an empathetic female doctor and is able to achieve a precarious grip on normality. At a funeral of a friend who successfully committed suicide, she does manage “I am, I am, I am,” an utterance that she ascribes to “the old brag of my heart.” Even as she recovers, she holds on to her memories of her madness, which allows her to keep her distance from long-standing social roles. The content of her character remains sketchy at best. It is not certain that she, like Platt herself, will not try suicide again.

Both *Bell Jar* and *Catcher* have stayed popular among new generations of teenagers. In part that popularity owes something to teachers who continue to assign the once-banned books in hope of being relevant. That Baby Boomers have nostalgia for the adolescence suggests that youthful alienation, rather than being regarded as an obstacle to coming to terms with one's self and one's feelings, has become a badge of authenticity and a protector of identity against change and social expectations. That the liminal state of adolescence functions as a king of ethnicity is testimony to the limits of postwar efforts to center the self.[^64]


[^64]: On adolescence as an ethnicity, see [@cheever2010, 25-7]
