onlinelibrary.wiley.com

A Theory of Capitalist Slavery - Clegg - 2020 - Journal of Historical Sociology

Abstract

The relationship between slavery and capitalism has become a renewed topic of debate, yet scholars have not been able to agree on a definition of capitalism. In this article I first clear up some misconceptions and situate the debate in the Marxian tradition from which it arose. I argue that while non‐Marxian accounts of capitalism fail to explain the key social transformations that have accompanied the rise of capitalism globally, Marxian accounts have failed to comprehend similar transformations that occurred on American slave plantations in the 19th century. I then present a general model of capitalism, building on earlier work by Brenner and Wood, that both incorporates and explains the distinctive dynamics of capitalist slavery in the antebellum South.

INTRODUCTION

The relationship between slavery and capitalism has recently become a topic of both scholarly and public debate.11 Jennifer Schuessler, "In History Departments, It's Up With Capitalism" _The New York Times _, Apr 6 2013; "Our withdrawn review 'Blood cotton,'" _The Economist _, Sep 5 2014; Edward Baptist "The Economist's review of my book reveals how white people still refuse to believe black people about being black," _The Guardian _, Sep 7 2014; Sven Beckert, "Slavery and Capitalism" _The Chronicle of Higher Education _, Dec 12 2014; Marc Parry "Shackles and Dollars: Historians and Economists Clash over Slavery" _The Chronicle of Higher Education _, Dec 8 2016; Stephanie McCurry, "Plunder of Black Life: The Problem of Connecting the History of Slavery to the Economics of the Present," _Times Literary Supplement _, May 19 2017. Matthew Desmond, "In order to understand the brutality of American capitalism, you have to start on the plantation," _The New York Times _ August 14, 2019. But while most scholars now agree that antebellum American slavery was in some sense "capitalist," they have generally avoided defining that term.22 For criticism of the recent historiography along these lines see Murray et al. (2015), Clegg (2015), Oakes (2016), Hudson (2016), Olmstead and Rhode (2018), Coclanis (2018), and Huston (2019). Moreover, it is not entirely clear what is at stake in this claim. To the extent that there is still any disagreement it appears to be over the normative question of whether capitalism is somehow tainted by its relationship to slavery. Thus left‐wing historians writing in _The Nation _ can today paint slavery as capitalism's "original sin", while a right‐leaning neoclassical economist can insist, in the pages of _Reason_, that capitalism and slavery have nothing in common (McCloskey 2018). Strikingly, the political and disciplinary sides of this debate appear to have completely flipped vis a vis the 1960s and 70s, when the Marxist historians argued that American slavery _wasn't _ capitalist, and the neoclassical economists argued it _was. _

This inversion is symptomatic of a number of transformations that this debate has undergone, from its origins in Marxism (and among Black Marxists in particular), through being taken up by academic historians and economists in the 1960s and 70s, to its recent revival by the "new historians of capitalism."33 A number of well received historical monographs (Johnson 2013; Baptist 2014; Beckert 2015; Schermerhorn 2015; Rosenthal 2018) have helped to make slavery a signature topic of this new field. In the course of this evolution the terms of the debate have often been modified, as have the analytical and normative stakes. In this article I will first attempt to clarify those stakes by clearing up two misconceptions and situating the debate in the Marxian tradition from which it arose. I will argue that while non‐Marxian accounts of capitalism fail to explain the key social transfor‐ mations that have accompanied the rise of capitalism globally, Marxian accounts often fail to comprehend similar transformations that occurred on American slave plantations in the 19th century. I will then sketch out a general model of capitalism that not only incorporates distinctive features of antebellum slavery but also helps to explain them.

TWO MISUNDERSTANDINGS

The first thing to point out is that there are in fact two distinct debates about the relationship between capitalism and slavery, which are often conflated by contemporary commentators. The so‐called "Williams debate," concerns the contribution of slavery to the (early) growth and development of British capitalism. Although it has precursors in the work of Marx and others, that debate was initiated by Eric Williams's influential _Capitalism and Slavery _ (1944), which argued that the slave trade, exclusive Caribbean markets, and slave‐grown sugar were foundational to 18th century capitalist development in Britain.44 Note at least two (perhaps three) distinct theses have been called "the Williams thesis." In addition to the thesis mentioned here, there is Williams's arguably more central thesis that the 19th century development of industrial capitalism was primarily responsible for the abolition of slavery. A third influential thesis of Williams was that New World slavery (itself driven by economic forces) was responsible for anti‐black racism, rather than vice versa. For an overview of the various Williams theses and the debates they spawned see Brandon (2017). A similar debate over the contribution of slave‐grown cotton to 19th century American growth and development has recently engaged some historians and economists.55 Baptist (2014), Beckert (2015), Rockman and Beckert (2016), Olmstead and Rhode (2018), and Wright (Forthcoming).

A second debate, to which I hope to contribute in this article, asks whether New World (and particularly American) slavery was itself "capitalist." I will refer to this as the "Genovese debate," after Eugene Genovese, who as far I can tell was the first historian to argue that the antebellum Southern economy wasn't capitalist.66 Genovese (1965). Prior to Genovese American historians of slavery paid little attention to this question. For example, neither U.B. Phillips' _American Negro Slavery _, nor Kenneth Stampp's _Peculiar Institution _—the two most influential historical monographs on American slavery prior to the 1960s—include any reference to "capitalism." Yet when earlier historians did consider this question they tended to come to opposite conclusions to Genovese. Thus in spite of their otherwise sharply opposed views on the economics of slavery, both Phillips and Lewis Gray referred to the antebellum plantation system as "capitalistic" (Phillips 1910, 39; Gray 1933). Genovese's claim was almost immediately contested by economic historians, who countered with new evidence showing that antebellum plantations were not only highly profitable, but were also economically efficient and dynamic.77 Good summaries of this debate include Aitken (1971), David et al. (1976) and Sutch (2018).

Not only have these debates largely run along separate tracks—divided by geography, discipline and field—but they are also substantively independent, in the sense that one's position in one debate has no necessary implications for one's position in the other. We can perfectly well believe, as Williams himself appears to have believed, that Caribbean slavery was necessary to British capitalist development without classifying Caribbean slave societies as "capitalist."88 This was a point for which Williams was criticized by his Marxist mentor C. L. R. James who argued that Caribbean sugar plantations were some of the first fully capitalist units of production (James 1943). The word "capitalism" occurs nowhere in Williams' dissertation, on which he based his book, and in the book he generally uses it to describe the domestic British industrial and commercial economy of the 18th and 19th centuries (Brandon 2017; Neptune 2019). We can also argue, as does Gavin Wright, that American slave plantations were fully capitalist, without implying that they were necessary to the growth or development of capitalism in the Northern states.99 Although Wright defends Williams' original thesis, he challenges those who seek to extend it to 19th century America (Wright, Forthcoming). Yet by conflating these debates contemporary commentators sometimes confuse evidence and implications pertaining to one debate for evidence and implications pertaining to the other.

A second misunderstanding concerns the contribution of Marx and Marxism to these debates. Both debates can be traced back to Marx's own, sometimes ambiguous, discussion of slavery and capitalism, a discussion that was revived by Black Marxists in the 1930s. Although this lineage has not always been clear to commentators and participants in the two debates, the Marxian legacy has been particularly obscured in the second debate. While Williams downplayed the influence of Marx on his thinking (an influence that came primarily through his mentor C.L.R. James), Genovese presented himself as a Marxist, and both he and his principal opponent in the debates of the 1960s and 70s, the neoclassical economic historian Robert Fogel, had been educated in the communist party.1010 Fogel was responsible for ex‐communicating Genovese from the Youth wing of the party (Roediger 2010, 231). But while Genovese's view of slavery as "pre‐capitalist" is now generally presented as Marxian orthodoxy (Johnson 2004; Huston 2019), he himself presented it as a _critique _ of that orthodoxy (Genovese 1971). In fact, it was Fogel and not Genovese who was defending an orthodox Marxist position in that debate.1111 In his early writings on slavery Genovese was merely restating the classical view that slavery was economically inefficient (either because slaves lacked incentives to work or slaveowners lacked incentives to invest or innovate), a view most famously associated with Adam Smith and U.B. Phillips. In later versions of this argument Genovese would shift to the Weberian claim that slaveowners lacked a "bourgeois mentality."

In keeping with Williams, Marx himself consistently noted the contribution of both Caribbean and North American slavery to British industrial development. In his first sole‐authored book, _The Poverty of Philosophy _, he wrote: "Without slavery you have no cotton; without cotton you have no modern industry" (Marx 1913). And towards the end of his last published book, _Capital _, he wrote: "The veiled slavery of the wage‐earners in Europe needed, for its pedestal, slavery pure and simple in the New World" (Marx 1971, 803). Yet in contrast to Genovese, Marx argued that American slavery in the 19th century was not a vestige of a patriarchal or feudal mode of production, but had become thoroughly capitalist.1212 Marx often emphasized that the transition to capitalist slavery worsened the lot of the slaves. See, e.g., his claim that slavery reaches "its most hateful form … in a situation of capitalist production" (Marx 2010, 197). See also Marx (1971, 377). He repeatedly refers to 19th century slaveowners as "capitalists" (Marx 1971, 260; 2010, 197; 1973, 513), emphasizing that we "not only call the plantation owners in America capitalists, but that they _are _ capitalists"(Marx 1973, 513). He also refers to slave plantations in the American South as places where "capitalist conditions predominate" (Marx 1981, 940), and "the capitalist mode of production exists" (Marx 1968, 303).1313 Note that Marx's references to slaveowners as capitalists are often qualified by emphasizing their exceptional nature with regard to the norm for both slaveowners (in other times) and capitalists (in other places). Thus Marx writes that capitalist plantations are "anomalies within a world market based on free labor," (Marx 1973, 513) and even that they are capitalist "only in the formal sense" because capitalist slavery "precludes free wage‐labor" and "has not arisen out of slavery but is grafted on to it"(Marx 1968, 303). While I will defend such a "formal" definition of capitalism in this article (i.e. one that doesn't include any reference to wage labor), Marx is clearly right to insist on the exceptional quality of capitalist slavery, since capitalism as a matter of fact has been been associated with the spread of wage labor. See note 60 below for my interpretation of Marx's reference to the "grafted" character of capitalist slavery.

Prior to Genovese most Marxist and Marxist‐influenced writers on American slavery followed Marx in viewing slave plantations as capitalist.1414 Schluter (1913), Shugg (1937), Hacker (1940), Foner (1941), and Himmel and Novack (1966). See also the example of Marxist‐influenced social scientists like Marvin Harris, Sydney Mintz, Barrington Moore, Immanuel Wallerstein, and Orlando Patterson, all of whom have argued that American slavery was capitalist. However, an early precedent for Genovese's approach emerged among American Marxists writing in the 1930s and 40s, who began to argue that the slave South represented a "hybrid" of feudalism and capitalism.1515 See, e.g., Harry Haywood and Herbert Aptheker. Genovese was influenced by these writers, and we can see echoes of this conception in his later characterization of slavery as "in but not of capitalism." However, Genovese attacked Aptheker in his early writing and also opposed this "hybrid" conception (Genovese 1971). Several factors appear to have contributed to this development, including the influence of Lenin and Stalin's writings on slavery, the political exigencies of the "popular front", and (as I shall argue in the next section) a tendency in both Marx and Marxists to sometimes _identify _ capitalism with free wage labor.1616 On the influence of Lenin's writings on American agriculture and Stalin's forays into historical sociology see (Patterson 1977, 411). The claim also appears to have underwritten the American Communist Party's interpretation of the Civil War as an unfinished bourgeois revolution whose task they saw themselves completing. However, it is important to note that this questioning of the capitalist character of slavery was resisted at the time by others Marxists, especially by Black Marxists like C.L.R. James (1938) and W.E.B. Du Bois (1935).

In the rest of this article I will defend the interpretation of James and Du Bois on empirical and analytical grounds, suggesting a way that the Marxian conception of capitalism can be usefully reformulated in line with new evidence about the capitalist character of slavery in the United States. But to conclude this section I want to compare and contrast the normative and political stakes of these debates. For Marx, James and Du Bois the normative implication of emphasizing the capitalist character of slavery was that it provided insight into what capitalism is and how and why it should be overthrown (Zimmerman 2016). By contrast, when Fogel and the other economic historians of the 1960s argued, against Genovese, that plantation slavery was capitalist they had no intention of thereby criticizing capitalism. Their point was rather that capitalism was morally neutral—it could be used for good or evil—and that moral progress required liberal rights to accompany the spread of market freedoms. For James and Du Bois, recognizing the capitalist character of American and Caribbean slavery also meant that the resistance of slaves (in the Haitian revolution and the US Civil War) constituted an important precursor to the workers' movements of their own day. Their point was not only that the slaves' self‐emancipation can provide inspiration for others seeking to lib‐ erate themselves, but that these materially distinct and historically distant movements were in fact resisting the same thing: capitalism.1717 In contrast to the new historiography, in which the slaves' "agency" is either denigrated or measured in terms of their _contribution _ to capitalist development (by, e.g., finding "cunning" ways to pick more cotton under threat of torture), James and Du Bois saw agency primarily in the slave's _resistance _ to capitalist slavery. See particularly James's critique of Aptheker (James 1939). James was also critical of Williams for underplaying slave resistance in his early work, a criticism that prompted Williams to add, just prior to publication of _Capitalism and Slavery _, a chapter on the slave's contribution to abolition (Brandon 2017). These considerations have today been largely forgotten, as questions of political agency and possibility have been replaced by a largely moralistic concern to identify the ways that modern American capitalism is still haunted by an evil legacy (Desmond 2019).

Yet if the normative stakes of the debate have thinned somewhat in recent years, the analytical ones appear to have dropped out entirely. Most parties to the earlier debate sought to clarify their theories of capitalism alongside empirical research into the antebellum economy, on the premise that doing so might improve our understanding of both capitalism and slavery. They asked whether the concept of capitalism can help to explain the peculiar dynamics of American slavery—it's historical evolution, persistence and eventual demise—as well as what that history might reveal about the concept of capitalism. Yet these aspirations appear to have been abandoned by the new historians of capitalism, who tend to eschew "theoretical definitions" in favor of an appeal to the brute facts of history.1818 Seth Rockman, a leading historian of capitalism, has commended the field's "disavowal of theoretical definitions" (Rockman 2014, 444). Louis Hyman, another prominent figure in the field, argues that "defining capitalism is a bad idea. It is too deductive." (Beckert et al. 2014, 517).

DEFINING CAPITALISM

On first glance the Genovese debate appears less interesting than the Williams debate, centering as it does on what seems like a mere question of terminology.1919 The two debates might better be viewed as conceptual vs. empirical approaches to the question of the relationship between capitalism and slavery in each of which the term "capitalism" stands in for a different object. The Genovese debate seems to be about the appropriate classification of an instance of slavery (i.e., a _conceptual _ relationship between capitalism and slavery) while the Williams debate is about the _causal _ relationship between Caribbean slavery and the emergence of ("commercial") capitalism in Europe (i.e. a _temporal _ and _spatial _ relationship between capitalism and slavery). Why should we care whether slavery is classified as capitalist? Especially when the answer to that question seems to rest on which of the many possible definitions of capitalism we decide to employ. The very fact that there are many possible (and contradictory) definitions might lead us to further question whether the concept of capitalism is actually useful to the empirical study of historical phenomenon, or whether it is simply a shibboleth indicating the political leanings of a given scholarly contribution.

It is perhaps for such reasons that the "new historians of capitalism" have been so reluctant to define their object of study. It is certainly the case that the Genovese debate was marked by inconsistent definitions, such that debate participants often found themselves talking past one another. We can, roughly speaking, identify three overlapping senses of "capitalism" in that debate, as well as in the historical and social scientific literature more broadly:

The _formal _ definition: A capitalist society is one in which production tends to be orientated towards exchange and monetary profit.
The _structural _ definition: A capitalist society is one in which the means of production are (a) privately owned by a class of capitalists (b) to whom the direct producers must sell their labor.
The _sociological _ definition: A capitalist society is one in which elites and institutions are characterized by a "bourgeois culture" or "capitalist mindset," variously described as "frugal," "rational", "calculating" and "profit‐seeking."
But these differences were not a mere matter of terminology, for these three definitions are associated with three theoretical approaches to the question of capitalism: neoclassical economics, Marxism, and Weberian sociology (Dobb 1963). Untangling them is not however always easy, for the definitions do not map onto these traditions one to one, but are associated in a cumulative manner: mainstream economists tend to adhere only to (1), Marxists tend to adhere to both (1) and (2),2020 Cohen (2000: 181) refers to (1) and (2) as the _modal _ and _structural _ definitions of capitalism, and describes them as "two equally standard but logically distinct Marxian definitions of capitalist society." and Weberians generally adhere to (1), (2) and (3).2121 As a matter of intellectual history all these definitions can be traced to Marx. Marx never provided a succint definition of capitalism, although contrary to scholarly belief he did use the term. The invention of the word is typically attributed to the French socialist Louis Blanc, but for Blanc it referred to a world‐view rather than a social system, and it seems that the word entered the English and German languages primarily through the influence of Marx's writings. For a long time the only non‐Marxist economists who employed the term were Austrian, and Bohm‐Bawerk settled on (1) during his critical engagement with Marx. This usage appears to have been introduced into the post‐war Anglo‐American economic mainstream by Friedrich Hayek and Lionel Robbins. Meanwhile Werner Sombart and Max Weber, drawing on Marx, adopted (1) and (2), whilst adding (3). Moreover, individual theorists sometimes shift the definitions and theories they employ. Genovese, for instance, began with the Marxist argument that Southern slavery was non‐capitalist according to definitions (1) and (2). However, when economic historians (who operated only with definition (1)) convinced him that slavery was profitable and economically efficient, he shifted to the Weberian argument that it was non‐capitalist according to (3).

Nor are these theories themselves just tautological exercises in vindicating their own classificatory schema. Each provides an answer not only to the question "what is capitalism?", but also "where does it come from?" They are _explanatory _, not merely classificatory. And their explanations are often implicit in the definitions themselves. For instance, (2) and (3) above may be seen less as separate definitions and more as shorthand explanations of (1), for they are essentially attempts to explain the formal features of capitalist societies. They can thus provide the basis for an _historical _ explanation: delineating the conditions that must be in place for capitalism to take root. Such expla‐ nations are particularly important for the coherence of a concept like capitalism, which may refer not only to a particular form of society (defined relationally and geographically) but also to a distinct phase in the history of societies or even the world.

So is the concept of capitalism analytically useful? Social scientists may be skeptical of a concept that appears so hard to define, and historians may cast doubt on hard‐and‐fast historical periodizations and origin stories. Yet it is important to recognize that theories of capitalism—arguably the first social scientific theories—were developed to understand rapid historical changes that were sometimes in the living memory of the theorists themselves. The rapidity of those changes can be gleaned from the fact that they have often been called "revolutions" (agricultural, industrial, bourgeois). What united some of the first social scientists (e.g. Smith, Marx and Weber) was the sense that human society was undergoing, or had recently undergone, an irreversible step change, from cyclical and timeless traditions to dynamic growth and continuous technological revolutions. Their perception, which was not always clear in their formal definitions, has since been confirmed by systematic archeological and documentary evidence. Figure 1 displays Angus Maddison's "hockey stick graph," showing the dramatic shift from economic stagnation to continuous productivity growth. While no periodization is perfect, and no origin complete, _something _ fundamental changed to human societies over the last 200 years. Theories of capitalism are the first—and arguably still the best—attempts to explain that change.2222 This is not to dismiss the rich literature on economic development, but rather to point out that it typically explicitly or implicitly relies on some concept of capitalism.

 image

Gross domestic product per capita in five countries, 1000–2015 AD. Source: CORE 2017, from the Maddison Project's data [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]

However, the three theories of capitalism mentioned above are not equally adequate to the task of explaining that change. Briefly we can summarize the account of capitalism's origins associated with these theories as: a Smithean account that points to a quasi‐universal psychological propensity to "truck, barter, and exchange," and the ineluctable spread of markets due to their superior efficiency; a Marxian account in which the elimination of direct (non‐market) access to the means of subsistence forces formerly subsistence‐orientated producers to sell their output or labor; and a Weberian account in which the spread of a "protestant spirit" explains the capitalist patterns of behavior listed in (3).

The Smithean account, in so far at it appeals to timeless truths about markets and human psychology, has trouble explaining the _absence _ of capitalism for 99.999% of human history. The Weberian account, by contrast, in so far as it appeals to a _particular _ culture or psychology (that of protestantism) has trouble explaining why capitalism has been able to spread to every corner of the earth (including non‐christian nations like Japan, China and India, as displayed in figure 1). The point is not that there are no cultural and psychological patterns that distinguish capitalist societies, the point, which Weber himself came to recognize in his later work, is that they themselves demand an explanation.

Weber's critique of his earlier position is worth quoting in full, for it clarifies how the structural definition (2) can provide an explanation for _both _ the formal (1) _and _ the sociological (3) patterns characteristic of capitalist societies:

"[S]triving for profit," for monetary gain, indeed for the greatest possible monetary gain, has nothing to do with capitalism itself. This striving has been found at all times and in every country in the world […] wherever it has been objectively possible to pursue it. It should be one of the first principles of cultural history that we abandon this naive conceptual definition once and for all. Totally unrestrained greed for acquisition cannot in the least be equated with capitalism, less still with its "spirit." Capitalism _can _ be virtually identical to the _taming _, or at least with the tempering, of this irrational instinct. Capitalism is, however, identical to the striving for _profit _, in the course of continuous, rational, capitalist enterprise, for _more and more _ profits, and for "_profitability. _" It must be. When the entire economy is organized on capitalist principles, an individual capitalist business that did not aim to achieve profitability would be doomed. 2323 Weber's "Prefatory Remarks to the Collected Essays in the Sociology of Religion" (1920), reproduced in Weber (2002: 359).

The mechanism to which Weber is here referring is one of _competitive selection _, a key point to which we will return below. Here it is simply necessary to add that looking to structural rather than cultural or psychological causes can also help to explain the "hockey stick" break exhibited in figure 1. For identifying a structural change can make sense of the universal patterns of behavior characteristic of capitalist societies (such as production for markets and the dominance of the profit motive, which exist across wide variations of culture) as well as the fact that such patterns were rarely found in pre‐capitalist societies.

Yet if figure 1 poses a problem for the Smithean and (classical) Weberian accounts, figure 2 represents a similar challenge to the Marxian account. In so far as that account relies on the structural definition stated in (2) it assumes that wage labor is a necessary feature of capitalist development (2b). For although Marx himself insisted that plantation slavery was capitalist, according to definition (2) slavery is non‐capitalist by definition.2424 Marx sometimes appears to identify capitalism with wage labor, such that his references to capitalist slavery may seem like a terminological inconsistency. See, however, his reference to a "formal sense" of capitalism quoted in note 13 above. Thus the standard structural account has trouble explaining why the rate of labor productivity growth exhibited on cotton plantations (figure 2) appears to have been significantly higher than that for British cotton mills over the same period.2525 This figure is based on Olmstead and Rhode's analysis of annual cotton output per slave (from census and industry data), which they find rose at an annual rate of 2.1–2.4 percent from 1800 to 1860 (Olmstead and Rhode 2010). Olmstead and Rhode corroborate this using data from daily cotton picking books. By comparison, according to the data assembled by Broadberry et al. (2011: Table 8) the annual rate of labor productivity growth in textiles in Britain over the same period—during the height of the industrial revolution—was only 1.8 percent. Nor is figure 2 an anomaly, for economic historians have found that regional income (GDP) in the antebellum South was growing faster over the 19th century than incomes in Britain.2626 Lindert and Williamson (2016: 112). Both Lindert and Williamson (2016: 102) and (Engerman 1967) found that Southern incomes were also growing faster than Northern incomes in the late antebellum period. The _levels _ of Southern incomes remained lower than the North if we include slaves in the population. Yet Engerman also provides figures for the free population only, and ones that count slaves as intermediate goods. These show Southern income as higher than the national average in 1860.

 image

Cotton bales per slave in agricultural workforce, 1801–1862. Source: Olmstead and Rhode (2010)

In the following I will argue that rather than jettisoning the Marxian account of capitalism in light of this evidence, we should jettison the special place it has traditionally assigned to wage labor. Thus, drawing on the signal work of Robert Brenner and Ellen Meiskins Wood, I will sketch out a structural theory of capitalism that is agnostic with respect to the specific form of labor commodification. On the one hand such a revised account can avoid the fudging evident in speaking of antebellum slavery as a "hybrid" mode of production (one that was "in but not of capitalism"), as we often see among Marxists. On the other hand it allows us to avoid defaulting to the largely descrip‐ tive (and sometimes naive) psychological and cultural theories of Smith and (the early) Weber, as we see among the new historians of capitalism.

RE‐DEFINING CAPITALISM

The re‐definition of capitalism that I will put forward in this article draws heavily on existing work on the transition to capitalism by Robert Brenner and Ellen Meiksins Wood.2727 Brenner (1976, 1982, 1977) and Wood (2002). The Brenner‐Wood model has been interpreted by both critics (Anievas and Nisancioglu 2014) and sympathizers (Post 2011) as implying that slavery was non‐capitalist.2828 Writings of both Brenner and Wood can be cited in support of this reading of their model. I believe, however, that this is largely a matter of Brenner and Wood's lack of familiarity with the new evidence on the relative dynamism of the antebellum Southern economy. I shall argue, however, that with some small modifications it can not only identify the capitalist character of American slavery, but also _explain _ it.

This is because the Brenner‐Wood model provides behavioral micro‐foundations for the aggregate formal patterns characteristic of capitalist societies without thereby naturalizing or universalizing those behaviors. It presents a model of agency within constraints, in which an account of culture and individual psychology does not rival socio‐structural explanation, but is rather nested within it (Chibber 2017). This allows us to reformulate, rearrange and clarify the relationship between the formal, sociological and structural definitions of capitalism given above. In this re‐formulation each of the above definitions corresponds to a different level in a single explanatory hierarchy that is in principle applicable to all modes of production:2929 For Brenner's description of the equivalent levels operating in feudalism see Brenner (2007). the formal corresponds to the surface level—the realm of appearances and aggregate patterns—the structural is the foundation—the ultimate driving force of the mode of production—and the sociological is a mediating meso‐level.

In this multi‐level model I revise the formal definition of capitalism to include the developmental patterns exhibited in figure 1. I emphasize not just production for profit, but specifically _monetary profit _, highlighting the centrality of money as a universal social medium under capitalism.3030 Standard accounts of capitalist production tend to be either too broad (production for exchange) or too ambiguous (commodity production) to capture the empirical _differentia specifica _ of capitalism, which is that productive activity is organized (into a complex division of labor) by the _monetary _ exchange of the products of that activity. Because under capitalism all the inputs to production are also either purchased or money, every productive activity can be immediately evaluated in terms of its profitability, or the difference between sale price and cost price. The widely recognized fact that under capitalism production is organized to maximize profit is thus inseparable from the money form of the capitalist product. Because they situate these formal characteristics of capitalism as the _explanandum _ rather than _explanans _ of a structural theory of capitalism, Brenner and Wood avoid mistaking them for either necessary or sufficient conditions.3131 An example of the former mistake would to identify brief periods of growth (or expansion of trade) in the ancient world as capitalist, e.g. (Neal and Williamson 2014). An example of the latter mistake would be to take any period of relative stagnation in a contemporary capitalist economy as evidence that it had reverted to pre‐capitalism. While capitalist societies are generally characterized by persistent economic growth and the dominance of the profit motive, these patterns hold only in the long‐run and on average, and in practice we will always be able to find exceptions.

At one level deeper in the explanatory hierarchy Brenner and Wood revise the sociological account of capitalist culture and psychology by specifying those economic behaviors subject to structural constraints, focussing particularly on the behavior of productive agents (in their model: smallholding farmers, self‐employed and wage workers, and capitalists). The key patterns of behavior that emerge from these constraints, which they call "rules of reproduction," may be envisaged as transmission mechanisms through which the structural level shapes the formal patterning of capitalist societies. Importantly, this approach avoids the pitfall of merely listing cultural correlates of capitalism that may or not be essential to it, as well as the danger of mistaking capitalism for an indeterminate totality.3232 Weber's theory of protestantism could be seen as a case of the former danger, the Frankfurt School's notion of capitalism could be as the latter danger. For a critical assessment of the notion of capitalism as an indeterminate totality see Endnotes (2000). In my account of this level I replace Brenner and Wood's references to wage labor markets with a general consideration of the subordination of laborers to capitalists (both free and enslaved). However, I leave intact their account of capitalist "rules of reproduction," (see below) which bears most of the explanatory burden in their model, and which I argue can provide specific insight into the behavior of antebellum slaveowners.

Finally, Brenner and Wood revise the structural definition by positing what they call "market dependence," rather than private ownership or wage labor, as the ultimate foundation of capitalism. Just as we have seen that the formal characteristics of market exchange and production for profit are not, in the Brenner‐Wood model, strictly necessary consequences of capitalist development (we can always find exceptions) so too they are not sufficient causes of that development.3333 For instance, Brenner and Wood show that the commercialization of Eastern European agriculture in Early Modern Era reinforced feudal relations (leading to "the second serfdom"). Markets have existed in most known societies, and wherever markets exist there are opportunities to profit. Only in capitalism, however, are producers _dependent _ on the market. This is because capitalist societies uniquely deny the vast majority of people any direct (non‐market mediated) access to their means of subsistence.3434 In short, under capitalism you need money to survive. In my reformulation of the Brenner‐Wood model I emphasize the other side of this condition: exclusively market‐mediated access to capital, land and labor, which compels production to respond to market signals.

The main link between this structural level (what Brenner and Wood call "social property relations") and the sociological level ("rules of reproduction") in the Brenner‐Wood model comes via selection pressure that market competition exerts on producers by virtue of their market dependency. Market dependent producers are compelled not only to sell their entire output (as opposed to their surplus, as peasants had done for millennia), but also to produce it at a competitive cost. For if and when any producers find ways to cut their costs then output prices will fall and/or input prices will rise, such that other producers will be unable to afford their inputs (including land and capital) unless they too find ways to cut costs. In weeding out higher‐cost producers market competition limits the set of viable reproduction strategies available to those who direct production. Brenner and Wood define the resulting capitalist "rules of reproduction" as: specialization (focus on the product(s) with the highest monetary return), innovation (develop and adopt new techniques that minimize cost relative to price), and accumulation (reinvest profits wherever they generate the highest return).3535 Brenner (2007: 61–62). Brenner and Wood's explanation for the aggregate behavior patterns characteristic of capitalist societies has features in common with theories of natural selection. Markets in which they must sell their outputs and buy their inputs constitute a producers, who must generate revenue in exces for producers, who must generate revenue in excess of costs in order to remain solvent, while in their model the wage labor market transfers these constraints onto wage workers, who depend on the solvency of their employers for money and risk unemployment if they fail to obey them. I argue below that the violence of the market‐dependent slave owner provides a more direct transmission of the capitalist survival constraint onto the productive activity of slaves.

In sum my revised version of the Brenner‐Wood model takes the form of the following explanatory hierarchy:

The formal level ("developmental patterns"):

production for monetary profit, b) rapid technical change, and c) persistent productivity growth. which is explained by:
The sociological level ("rules of reproduction"):

Subordination of workers to capitalists, and competitive pressures on firms to:

1. specialize (focus on the product(s) with the highest return), b) innovate (develop and adopt the most efficient techniques), and c) accumulate (reinvest surpluses).
which is explained by:

The structural level ("social property relations"):
The elimination of direct (non‐market) access to the means of subsistence, and the spread of markets (backed by commercial and credit law) capable of allocating capital, land and labor.

Importantly, while in their historical account of the transition Brenner and Wood lay great emphasis on the growth of wage labor in early modern England, and their account of capitalist "rules of reproduction" highlight the dynamics of wage labor markets, wage labor plays no essential role in their account of what capitalism is at the deepest level. For Brenner and Wood the deep structure of capitalist societies is simply given by the market‐dependence of productive agents, whether they be smallholding farmers, self‐employed workers, wage laborers, or (perhaps most importantly for their model) capitalists themselves. Moreover their historical account identifies a recognizably capitalist pattern of development in 16th century English agriculture, one that operates principally on tenant farmers and landlords rather than employers and wage laborers.3636 The effect of this developmental pattern of capitalist agriculture was in fact to create a class of landless laborers that consolidated wage‐labor based capitalist agriculture and enabled industrial expansion, but these are _effects _ of the transition in Brenner and Wood's account, not its causes. In principle, therefore, the Brenner‐Wood model of capitalism can apply to modes of production not based on wage labor. In the following I will argue that it actually does apply to the case of slavery in the 19th century United States.

Formal patterns

With respect to production for monetary profit the organization of production under antebellum slavery clearly conformed to the standard capitalist pattern. No slaves would have been brought to America if money couldn't be made from doing so, and slaveowners rarely purchased slaves unless they could earn a monetary return from their purchase. The source of that return was the typical slave's ability to produce more value than their costs of reproduction, generating large potential profits for their owners.3737 It may be objected that not all production on plantations was for monetary exchange. After all, it is well known that American plantations were often close to self‐sufficient in foodstuffs. However, this may be compared to the vertical integration common among large corporations, many of whom in‐house some portion of the production of their inputs. See in particular Anderson and Gallman (1977). Actual returns on slave investments, however, rarely rose above the average profit rate, reflecting the ability of slave prices to adjust upwards as slaveowners capitalized on the growing potential profit from exploiting slave labor.3838 Conrad and Meyer (1958), Sutch (1965), and Foust and Swan (1970). The potential profits tended to be higher than those from employing wage labor because slaves could be compelled to work harder at lower subsistence cost.3939 This notion of "potential profit" is homologous to the Marxian concept of surplus value. See the appendix for my estimates of comparative rates of exploitation of slave and wage labor.

What about the evidence on productivity growth? Early studies of the technical organization of labor on cotton plantations assumed that it changed little over time. That view was, however, overturned by Alan Olmstead and Paul Rhode's evidence, displayed in figure 2, which shows that slave productivity increased by roughly 2% per year from 1800 to 1860.4040 For a closer comparison: Parker and Klein (1966) attribute to mechanization and other non‐land inputs a 1.3 percent annual labor productivity growth in U.S. wheat from 1839–1909. Moreover, we know that rapid productivity growth was not limited to cotton plantations. Richard Follett (2000) presents similar evidence from antebellum Louisiana sugar plantations, citing the introduction of steam‐powered mills, railways for transporting cane, and the vacuum pan. The effects of labor produc‐ tivity growth were amplified by the modernization of Southern transportation networks (Majewski 2011) and financial innovations (Kilbourne 1995, 2006; Martin 2010), all of which were reflected in the above‐mentioned evidence of high rates of income growth in the antebellum South.

Of course, we cannot know whether this growth would have continued in the absence of the Civil War.4141 This remains a controversial point among some scholars, for although few today claim that the Southern economy was moribund on the eve of the Civil War, some (e.g. Wright 2013) have pointed to exceptionally high cotton demand in the 1850s, suggesting that Southern growth would have subsided even without the war. Yet capitalism is no stranger to periods of stagnation and decline. The relevant question is not whether falling demand for cotton would have led to a decline in slaveowner profits in the 1870s, but rather whether given enough time the institution of slavery could have adapted by cutting costs or shifting into new lines of production, and was thus compatible with a long run growth trajectory. In this regard evidence on earlier transformations in the composition of slave‐produced goods (from wheat to tobacco in the Chesapeake, and from indigo to cotton in the Carolinas) suggests that American slavery was indeed capable of adapting to shifting patterns of demand. (Fogel 2006: 65–66). Nor can we conclude from this evidence (as some have tried to) that slavery was essential to American economic growth.4242 Baptist (2014) and Johnson (2013) point out that in 1860 cotton exports made up over 50% of total US exports, but they neglect that exports were never more than 10% of US GDP, such that (contrary to Baptist's accounting) the total annual contribution of cotton to the US economy never exceeded 5%. It is more reasonable to argue that the institution of slavery made an outsized contribution to US growth through establishing strong protections for property rights in the US constitution (Einhorn 2015). There are a number of ways that, despite its record of profitably and innovation, the "peculiar institution" may have impeded long run regional (and even national) economic development.4343 Gavin Wright has pointed out that slaveowners discouraged free immigration to the South, leading to the underdevelopment of local towns and cites (Wright 2013). This in turn may have restricted the development of transportation networks beyond those used to export cotton, and put limits on the economies of scale and scope associated with growing metropolitan hubs, e.g. in finance and industry. Slaveowners' attempts to curb literacy among their slaves may also have contributed to the under‐development of the South's education system, which many have argued lies behind the region's relative poverty (Bertocchi and Dimico 2012). Nonetheless, within the context of the model presented here the observed rate of technical innovation and productivity growth on antebellum slave plantations are enough to suggest an underlying capitalist dynamic.

Sociological rules of reproduction

To apply the Brenner‐Wood model to slaveowners requires us to look at their reproductive strategies, or "rules of reproduction." Specifically can we find evidence of what Brenner and Wood identify as the essential capitalist rules of "specialization, innovation, and accumulation"?

Let's start with specialization. Census data indicate that slave‐based cotton plantations tended to specialize much more in a single marketable crop than non‐slaveowning farms (Wright 1978, p. 56–62; 2013, p. 100–102). Gavin Wright argues that this is because large slaveowners were insulated from the risks of specialization: they could borrow against their slaves to tide them over periods of falling prices or poor harvests, and they could take advantage of bumper harvests without facing the risk of labor shortages because women and children could also be forced to work in the fields (p. 105–111). Plantations could rarely, if ever, be described as truly mono‐crop agriculture, and cotton specialization actually increased after slavery was abolished (Wright 1986). But in an antebellum context where security generally meant diversification, large Southern plantations were among the most specialized and market‐orientated farms in the country.

The above‐mentioned rates of labor productivity growth also suggest a high degree of innovation, but the evidence on mechanical innovation is mixed. The cotton gin was clearly an indigenous innovation that revolutionized cotton production.4444 Lakwete 2005. Bateman and Weiss (1981) estimate that 100,000 slaves were employed in ginning in 1860, making the "ginning industry" the second largest in the United States in terms of output and employment, after flour milling. However beyond the ginning process, cotton planting relied on relatively primitive tools throughout the antebellum period. Thus average capital (tools and machinery) per worker tended to be lower in the South than in Northern agriculture, where the wheat harvest was already mechanized by 1850.4545 Fleisig 1976; Wright 1978: 50–5. Wright is aware that these results (from the 1860 census) may be read as comparing wheat to cotton as much as slave to free labor. He has recently tried to answer this objection by drawing on research by James Irwin into slave wheat plantations in the Piedmont region of Virginia. Irwin's data show that farms in the region without slaves employed more farm implements per worker in 1850. However, the difference vanishes by 1860, as both slave and non‐slave farms in the Piedmont increased their investment in capital per worker (Wright 2013: 120). Thus this example actually seems to show that slave plantations were capable of dynamic technological adaption. On the other hand, harvesting cotton is a much more delicate and complex task, and those who want to blame slavery for the absence of mechanization have to account for the 80 year gap between the abolition of slavery and the eventual mechanization of the cotton harvest (in the 1940s). Claims that slavery was incompatible with mechanization must also contend with the fact that Louisiana sugar plantations were among the most mechanized agricultural sites in the world, with the employment of steam power in rolling, milling and crushing the sugar cane, complex chemical and mechanical processes in distilling, and even some plantation railways to cart everything around. All the above were typically run and maintained by skilled slave mechanics.4646 See Delfino and Gillespie 2008; Follett 2000.

Moreover, labor‐productivity‐enhancing innovation consists not only of mechanization and the development of tools, but also more efficient labor processes, and (in agriculture) the use of better fertilizers and the cultivation of more productive varieties of crops. Caitlin Rosenthal's recent study of plantation accounts (Rosenthal 2018) confirm Fogel and Engerman's description of a careful measurement and allocation of labor on large plantations comparable to Taylorist methods which became widespread only with the development of the Fordist assembly line (a comparison that James (1938) had already made with regard to Haitian sugar plantations). As evidence of a supposed lack of innovation, Genovese (1965, p. 88–95) points to the failure of reformers like Edmund Ruffin and Thomas Affleck to convince their fellow slaveowners of the benefits of marling and guano as fertilizer. But such techniques were no more successful in the North, where the "wasteful" use of abundant land was just as prevalent—indeed, it may be considered a rational response to relative factor prices. Olmstead and Rhode (2010) attribute much of their findings of slave labor productivity growth to what they call "bio‐technological innovation" in cotton—the experimental development of higher‐yield and easier‐to‐pick strains. Based on their own detailed estimates of both sectors, they conclude these new cotton hybrids had a greater effect on slave labor productivity than the effect of the mechanical wheat harvester on the productivity of Northern farm labor.4747 They also suggest that the increase of measured output following the Western movement of slavery may have been due more to these new varieties being initially adapted to the Western climate in which they were developed than the fertility of land per se (Olmstead and Rhode 2010: 26–27). Edward Baptist has contested Olmstead and Rhode's interpretation of their evidence, arguing that torture (specifically a competitive and ratcheting system of whipping those who fail to meet productivity targets) was the "ultimate cause" of the productivity growth identified by Olmstead and Rhode. However, he has failed to provide consistent evidence in support of his alternative intepretation (Olmstead and Rhode 2018; Clegg 2015).

We know less about accumulation. There have been no systematic studies of savings or investment among slaveowners. Ransom and Sutch (1982) speculate that the South had a lower savings rate due to a wealth effect from slave population growth. But since capital markets were nationally unified (Bodenhorn and Rockoff 1992) there is no reason to think that this in itself would have led to lower rates of Southern investment or accumulation (Moes 1961). Bateman and Weiss (1981) find that Southern investment in manufacturing was sub‐optimal, yet rapid accumulation did take place in the South. Gallman (1992) found that in spite of the concentration of banking and industry in the Northeast, the South had the highest per capita wealth of any region.4848 He also finds that two out of every three of the wealthiest Americans (those making over over $100,000) in 1860 lived in the South. Note, however, that if the value of slaves is deducted from regional wealth then the South as a region falls behind the North, even if wealth is calculated on a per free capita basis (Wright 2013). However, the primary form of investment in the South was in slaves. The relative liquidity of slave collateral made it attractive to creditors. In so far as slaves were purchased on credit (from either factors or the banking system) then the ultimate funding (the source of debt‐repayment) generally came from the monetary surplus produced by slaves, which was steadily growing across the 19th century. By 1860 total slave wealth was greater than the value of all the factories and railroads of the US combined (Huston 1999).

Underlying structures

Labor

In the typical Brenner‐Wood model it is primarily the power of employers in labor markets that allows them to impose capitalist rules of reproduction on workers. Slavery obviated this function of labor markets, for it gave slaveowners a direct power that no employer of wage labor possessed. But labor markets nonetheless remained a primary conduit through which competitive constraints operated in the antebellum South. An oft‐repeated line of Genovese's was that under slavery, "the market mediated the buying and selling of goods, not of labor‐power."4949 Genovese and Fox‐Genovese 1983: 117. For almost identical formulations see Hahn (1983: 223), Egerton (1996: 212) and Kolchin (1993: 172). But of course the market _did _ mediate the buying and selling of slave labor‐power.5050 Of course if one were to _define _ labor‐power as labor exchanged for a wage then this statement would be trivially true. But I argue below that the Marxian distinction between labor and labor‐power applies equally to the slave as to the wage laborer. See note 67 below. The slave labor market played a central role in distributing labor‐power between regions, sectors, and individual plantations. And the geographical integration of this market, as well as the systems of credit and insurance that supported it, suggest that it did so more smoothly and efficiently than 19th century wage labor markets, which were renowned for their frictions.5151 For monopsony in the antebellum cotton industry see Vedder et al. (1978) and Naidu and Dittmar (2012). Many writers assume that because slaves were typically purchased outright, whilst wage‐labor could only be hired, slave labor markets must have been less allocatively efficient. But insofar as it is capable of being _either _ hired _or _ purchased, slave labor is just like any other commodity (it is wage labor that is perverse in this respect), the liquidity of which is a function not of the type of ownership but of the availability of rental and resale markets (Engerman 1973). Studies indicate that in the antebellum South slaves were a highly liquid asset.5252 Several studies have demonstrated the national integration of the antebellum slave market (Tadman 1996; Rosenbloom 2002; Deyle 2005) as well as the use of rapid communication and advanced accounting (Johnson 2001; Coleman and Hutchinson 2006; Fleischman and Tyson 2004; Heier 2010) Thus it is simply wrong to argue, as does Charles Post, that the capital they had "sunk" in slaves made slaveowners "unable to 'expel' labour from production" when new technologies enabled them to reduce their labor demand (Post 2011, p. 133–134). For they could and did do just that: by selling them to a ready market of buyers and dealers.5353 Slave labor _did _ exhibit some indivisibilities (due to thin rental markets) that made it harder to adjust the firm‐level labor supply over short time horizons, but this is a separate issue, and one unlikely to affect technical choice and investment in the way suggested by Post.

It might be objected that whilst markets played a central role in mediating the _distribution _ of slave labor across productive units, they are largely absent from the production process itself. For instance they do not allocate labor _within _ the productive unit. This is true, at least not in any direct sense. But then neither do wage labor markets. As Marx explained, the employment contract precedes and influences the labor process but it doesn't actually do the work. Specifically it can't directly determine the quantity and quality of effort exerted by the laborer (Marx 1971, ch. 6). Moreover to the extent that market pressures _indirectly _ influence the outcome (e.g. so‐called efficiency wages) this represents a loss of potential income for capitalists, as well of overall market efficiency. Similar problems of asymmetric information, monopsony, adverse selection and moral hazard, which are often endemic to wage labor markets, were minimized in slave markets due to the fact that contracts either took place between known slaveowners or were supplemented by secondary insurance contracts (Naidu and Dittmar 2012; Ralph 2012).

The distinction between slaves and wage laborers, then, does _not _ consist in whether their labor‐power is bought and sold. Rather this is what _unites _ them, whilst simultaneously distinguishing them from all other forms of labor, whether it be the labor of peasants, serfs, or members of the family or tribe. The fact that both slave and wage labor are _commodified _ is precisely what makes them suitable to capitalist accumulation. Their ability to exchange money for labor, whether slave or "free", allows capitalists to expand production within a given sector (often by bidding labor away from competitors) and to thereby take advantage of the economies of scale which can fund such an ex‐ pansion. In this way more efficient capitalists are able to out‐compete the less efficient, opening the way to self‐reinforcing spirals of specialization, innovation and rising productivity. By contrast a feudal lord is much more constrained in his capacity to expand his labor force. His principal means in this respect is the violent conquest of peasants belonging to other lords. Thus in this case the competitive mechanism favors the most militarily adept rather than the most efficient producers. The same may be said of slaveowners in ancient civilizations where slave markets were limited or non‐existent.5454 Most historical instances of slavery consisted of household or communal slavery, where slaves were neither purchased on markets nor produced for markets. Even in Greece and Rome, where extensive slave markets first emerged, slaves were often primarily distributed via non‐market mechanisms, e.g. spoils of war. See, e.g., Patterson (1979). As to the question of which mechanism was dominant in the antebellum United States, we need only point to the estimated net transfer, from 1820 to 1860, of more than half a million slaves from the less productive plantations of the Old South to the more productive plantations in the New South _via domestic slave markets alone _ (Deyle 2005).5555 It is true that while slaveowners were dependent on markets to reproduce themselves as slaveowners, slaves themselves (unlike wage laborers) were not directly dependent on markets. Some writers have argued that the slave's status as a valuable asset to their owner meant that they could expect a guaranteed access to their means of subsistence. However, while such expectations might sometimes be reasonable, they hardly amounted to guarantees. In monetary terms the life of a slave to their owner is only worth as much as the value of the goods they can be expected to produce discounted by the current interest rate, and the price of both goods and money could change at any point in ways unfavorable to a slave's life chances. Moreover, partial security of subsistence is of little solace when weighed against the powers of disciplinary violence possessed by slaveowners. Thus if slaves valued their own well‐ being (and ultimately their own lives) they had to follow orders, and since those giving the order were market dependent, the competitive "rules of reproduction" of the latter were indirectly imposed on their slaves. Moreover, while the greater use of physical punishment distinguishes slaves from wage laborers, economic forms of coercion also applied to slaves. An individual slave who proved unproductive faced not only the threat of punishment, but also of being sold. Even the most benevolent master, who refused to punish or sell his slaves, had to remain financially solvent in order for the community of his slaves (and the integrity of their families) to be preserved. Thus in the final analysis the rules of slave reproduction are also shaped by the exigencies of the market: those who don't conform to competitive norms of productivity could have no guarantees of being able to reproduce themselves and their families.

Capital

Whilst labor markets _allow _ capitalists to profit at the expense of their laborers, they are _compelled _ to do so when subject to competitive markets for other factors of production: namely land and capital. With direct, non‐market access to land, subsistence is conditional only on the exigencies of nature; without it (i.e. without direct access to land sufficient to provide subsistence) subsistence becomes conditional on the market, and thus on competitive cost‐cutting behavior. Land markets emerged from an early point in the British North American colonies. However, the supply of land in the antebellum United States was unusually elastic due to the genocidal appropriation of native land on an expanding frontier, which tended to suppress land prices and hinder the emergence of a rental market. Historians of "the market revolution" have argued that the consolidation of land‐ownership (the end of the frontier) combined with patterns of indebtedness to shift American farmers towards market dependence (Stokes and Conway 1996).

According to these historians, American farmers initially sold only what they needed to pay for taxes and luxury items. But the need to provide an inheritance for large numbers of children (the North American colonies had the highest reproduction rate in the world) forced families to save. Taxes rose after the revolution, but it was increasingly credit from merchants and land‐banks that stimulated the growth of a money economy. The most significant cost facing new farmers (whether they be immigrants, or sons and daughters for which the existing family plot was insufficient), was that of clearing land and building homesteads, and it was principally for this that early Americans went into debt. The vagaries of weather and the volatility of crop prices constituted systemic risks that farm revenues would fail to cover interest payments, leading to foreclosure. What kept farmers borrowing in this context was a uniquely American means of hedging those risks: land speculation. Rather than a conspiracy of Eastern merchants and bankers to subdue the western farmer, land speculation might more reasonably be seen as the means by which the western farmer attempted to preserve his independence and patrimony. Plentiful and inexpensive uncultivated land meant that new settlers typically bought far more than they required for themselves (Lebergott 2009). The clearing of surplus land during the off‐season gave them a ready source of capital gains with which to offset the risks of low prices or bad harvests. But the cumulative effect of mounting indebtedness, together with an increasingly efficient legal enforcement of credit or claims, was that it imposed on farmers the need for liquidity and hence greater specialization in cash crops (Levy 2012). The market revolution literature suggests that Northern farmers borrowed themselves into market dependency.

That same literature has tended to deny the presence of a market revolution in the South (Egerton 1996). Yet if the combination of cheap land, credit, and expected capital gains can explain the transition to widespread market dependence in the North, then a similar explanation has even more power for the South. For Southern slaveowners had all of these things in greater abundance. Slaveowners were some of the most highly indebted individuals in the US (Sloan 2001; Martin 2010). The slave‐based production of agricultural exports had always depended on credit, initially from "factors" who represented British merchants and extended short‐term loans in exchange for a consignment of the crop. This arrangement reflected scale economies in transportation and marketing, as well as the reliance of early planters on imports. However by the 1830s the principal source of credit had shifted from international merchants to domestic banks, and the stability of the cotton economy as well as changes in debt‐collection law meant that the latter were increasingly willing to advance capital for the purchase of land and slaves (Green 1972; Woodman 1968).

On the demand side the rise of slaveowner indebtedness in the 19th century is explained by similar factors as in the North. If Northerners tended to purchase a few dozen acres of surplus land, then slaveowners tended to purchase a few thousand.5656 Uncultivated plantation lands were so vast they enabled some non‐slaveowning Southerners to subsist simply from customary rights to hunt and fish them (Blackburn 2011: 87). But slaveowners also had access to an additional source of capital gains to hedge the risks of specialization: the value of their slaves. The abolition of the international slave trade in 1808 led to an increase in the price of female slaves, whose fertility was subsequently the only means by which this form of capital could expand (Coleman and Hutchinson 2006) . From then on the positive rate of reproduction of the American slave population (virtually unique among Atlantic slave societies) represented, from the perspective of the slaveowners, a kind of negative depreciation, for here was a rare form of capital that grew "naturally," with only minimal investment. And just as the security these human assets provided reduced the risk of market specialization, so they could also be mortgaged for the purchase of new land and slaves. Indeed so common were such loans (and so reliable were they viewed) that in the 1830s entire banks were capitalized with the mortgaged land and slaves of Southern planters (Schweikart 1987).

However, when many of these banks failed in the 1840s they demonstrated that credit and capital gains are not simply ways that wealth holders are enabled to specialize for the market, for debt collection is also a means of _enforcing _ market dependence (Clegg 2017). Just as with Northerners, the failure to make regular interest payments raised the threat of foreclosure. And as "personal" property slaves enjoyed less protection from creditors than real property.5757 Morris (1999) describes the failed attempts by debt‐encumbered slaveowners to have slaves reclassified as real property. While in the midst of a crisis Northerners were often able to petition local legislatures for debt forgiveness, indebted slaveowners were generally unsuccessful in doing so. Crises often coincided with the movement of slaveowners westward in search of better cotton lands, and the bankruptcy of Eastern slaveowners was treated as an opportunity to buy up slaves at fire‐sale prices. My own research indicates that more than half of all slave sales in South Carolina in the 1840s took the form of court sales to repay creditors.5858 Clegg (2017: 13). For a similar estimate see Balleisen (2001: 167). In sum, indebted slaveowners were under pressure to specialize, innovate and accumulate, and over time the tendency was for all of them to follow these "rules of reproduction," for failure to do so ultimately meant that they would cease to be slaveowners.

TWO CLARIFICATIONS

It is worth briefly addressing two sets of objections that are commonly levied against claims (of the kind I have made in this article) about the capitalist character of antebellum slavery. Each set of objections can be mapped onto the two misconceptions that I identified in section 2 above.

The first objection concerns the supposed implications of the claim for our broader conception of American, Atlantic or capitalist history. The worry here is that in arguing that both Northern and Southern states were organized along capitalist lines one is erasing their differences, including the obvious differences in their social relations of production, and thereby either denying the role of those differences (even _contradictions _) in Civil War causation, or underplaying the transformation wrought by emancipation.5959 Oakes (2016), McCurry (2017), and Huston (2019). But while one finds both tendencies in the recent historiography, neither conclusion in fact follows from the description of the Southern slave economy as capitalist.

First, as I argued in section 2, it is one thing to classify the slave economy in the South as "capitalist", it is quite another thing to say that capitalist growth and development in the North "depended" on Southern slavery. The latter claim does indeed pose problems for explanations of the Civil War, but it neither stands nor falls on the capitalist character of slavery. Wars between capitalist states, and civil wars within capitalist states, can be and often are driven by economic motives. At the same time capitalist economies can be and often were historically dependent on non‐capitalist ones. While I am skeptical of attempts to extend the Williams thesis to the relationship between Northern and Southern states (as I suspect Williams himself would have been) nothing I have said in this article commits me to a position one way or another on this question.6060 For a critical review of attempts to extend the Williams thesis to the antebellum Northern economy see Wright (Forthcoming). However, in keeping with Marx's occasional discussion of capitalist slavery as a "grafted" and "anomalous" historical construct (see note 13 above), it may be useful to reverse the relation of dependency posited by the new historians of capitalism, such that rather than emphasizing the ways that Northern industrial wage labor was dependent on slave labor, we might better understand the anomalous form of capitalist slavery in the American South by recognizing that it depended on the existence of wage laborers in Britain and North, as a source of growing direct and indirect demand for slave‐produced raw materials.

Second, to say that both Southern slaves and Northern wage laborers were subject to labor processes governed by capitalist constraints is not to identify their conditions. Workers under capitalism experience a broad range in the extent and form of exploitation, and there is arguably no greater difference than between slaves and wage laborers. I argue in the appendix that emancipation led to a substantial reduction in the rate of exploitation of Southern labor, but it clearly entailed much more that. Among other things it reunited countless families, eliminated the overseer and his whip, expropriated half of the South's assets, and led to a brief but comparatively unique period in which formerly enslaved men could vote and get elected to public office. The claim that the Southern economy was capitalist before and after this transformation in no way detracts from its momentous character.

The second set of objections tend to come from Marxist or Marxist‐influenced scholars, who, despite the evidence I presented in section 2 on the views of Marx (and most Marxist writers prior to Genovese), suggest the notion of "capitalist slavery" is inconsistent with Marxian value theory.6161 Among Marxist‐influenced historians of slavery these claims have been made by Mandle (1972), Post (1982), Fields (1985), and Ashworth (2011). In the scholarship on Marxian theory more generally we can find similar claims in Elster (1983), Harvey (2010), Linden and Roth (2013), and Murray (2016). While I don't have space to address all their arguments here, I will focus on two common misconceptions: 1) that slaves must necessarily produce less surplus value than wage laborers, due to one or another feature of the slave labor process, or 2) that since slaves are "fixed capital" they (like machinery in Marx's value theory) cannot generate surplus value at all. The former misconception derives from a set of arguments most famously associated with Adam Smith about the supposed inefficiency of slave labor.6262 Smith was influenced by David Hume, and his arguments were taken up and developed by J.E. Cairnes, who in turn influenced Marx. None of these writers, it should be noted, had ever set foot in the Caribbean or the US. Their arguments can be summarized in the following four claims: 1) slaves have fewer incentives to learn skills or find ways to increase productivity, 2) slaveowners lack the threat of dismissal and face additional costs of supervision, 3) slave ownership absorbs capital that could otherwise be productively employed, and 4) for all these reasons slave agriculture is technologically backward and exhausts the soil. Both on their own terms, and in so far as they were supposed to limit profitability or growth, none of these claims withstood the critical scrutiny of the 1960s debates. Marx himself appears to have accepted some of these arguments, and they were the basis upon which Genovese had initially defended his claim about the "pre‐capitalist" character of Southern slavery. The empirical refutation of these arguments, was the main result of the slavery debates in the 1960s and 70s, in which economic historians demonstrated the equal or greater economic efficiency of slave plantations compared with free farms.6363 Conrad and Meyer 1958; Sutch 1965; Foust and Swan 1970; Fogel and Engerman 1975; Fogel 1977 The Genoveses conceded most of these points (Genovese and Fox‐Genovese 1983, 43, 96) and shifted, in the 1970s, to a Weberian claim that Southern slaveowners has a pre‐capitalist "mentality." In the appendix I provide evidence, drawing on this research, indicating higher rates of surplus value extracted from slaves than from contemporaneous wage laborers.6464 It should be noted that there is a logical as well as an empirical problem with this objection, for it suggests that capitals with consistently lower rates of surplus value (a key element in Marx's theory of profit rate equalization) should somehow be classed as "non‐capitalist." The latter claim is based on a theoretical confusion between "fixed" and "constant" capital.6565 See e.g. Charles Post (2018: 328), who writes that "the slave was a form of fixed capital—a constant element of the production process." Fixed capital is capital that is tied up for long periods. It is opposed to "circulating capital," which includes not only wage payments but also any other regular expenditures such as those for raw materials and energy.6666 This distinction, based only on the temporal regularity of payments, is more fluid than the variable/constant one, since all capital may be considered circulating over a long enough time horizon. Constant capital, on the other hand, refers to those inputs that, in Marxian terms, simply _transfer _ their value to the produced commodity. It is opposed to "variable capital," which is the money that exchanges for labor‐power, which _adds _ value to the commodity.6767 Post (2017: 183) claims, that "what distinguishes wage labor from slave labor is the purchase and sale of _labor‐power _ rather than the purchase and sale of the _laborer. _" Yet this is a false opposition, for "labor‐power" is a generic term for the commodified form of the human capacity to labor. The bare concept does not specify for _what period _ or _by whom _ the labor is sold, and Marx often refers to slave "labor‐power" as bought and sold in slave markets (Marx 1981, 509; 1935, 20). These categorical distinctions are not homologous. Constant capital may take both a fixed and circulating form, for it consists both in long‐term investments in plant and equipment, and short‐term investments in raw materials and energy. Conversely, variable capital may also take both fixed and circulating forms. In so far as it takes the form of expenditure on wages it is part of the circulating capital, for like expenditures on raw materials, wage payments tend to be recurrent in the short‐term (weeks or months rather than years). When slaves are rented, all of the variable capital circulates, just like wages. To purchase a slave, on the other hand, is to make a long‐term (i.e. _fixed _) investment in variable capital. However, even in this case the total cost of slave labor‐power is not all fixed, for slave maintenance costs form part of the circulating capital (Anderson and Gallman 1977). As I argue in the appendix, the difference between these maintenance costs and the net product of slave labor is the appropriate measure of slave exploitation, with the renter/rentee or buyer/seller sharing the remaining surplus value. Thus while mapping Marxian categories onto the slave production process is not self‐evident, if we do so carefully we are not compelled to draw the conclusion that slaves were not exploited in the Marxian sense, a conclusion that would, in any case, be a reason for rejecting a Marxian framework rather than for viewing slavery as "non‐capitalist."6868 For a model that clarifies how and why American slaves produced surplus value in Marx's sense see Clegg and Foley (2018).

CONCLUSION

From the mid 1970s Genovese's claim that slaveowners were "pre‐" or "non‐capitalist" was based on a notion of "capitalist mentality", which, although it reaches opposite conclusions, shares broadly similar features with psychological and cultural conceptions of capitalism to be found among both neoclassical economic historians and the new historians of capitalism. What they all lack is a structural theory of capitalism capable of accounting for long run patterns of technological development and market specialization under North American slavery. The model I have presented here, based on Brenner and Wood's approach, begins not with the mentality of the individual slaveowner (e.g. whether they maximized utility, delighted in power for its own sake, or clung to their paternalistic traditions), nor with free‐floating historical periodizations (such as "war capitalism" or the "capitalist world system"), but rather with identifiable structural constraints operating on key points of decision‐making within the production process. This allows us to ground a theory of capitalism in operative material and institutional mechanisms, as well as verifiable patterns of behavior.

On this theory antebellum plantations were indeed organized along capitalist lines, and they were capitalist not because slaveowners had a "capitalist mentality," nor because they happened to exist within an ineffable "capitalist world system." They were capitalist for the simple reason that land and slaves could only be acquired through markets, typically on credit. Only a profitable plantation could afford these inputs, and if a planter failed to produce cotton at a competitive cost he would be threatened with foreclosure. These constraints no doubt shaped the mentality of slaveowners, but crucially they operated independently of it, for a planter who lacked the right mentality risked losing his land and slaves to one who didn't.

In this respect US slavery may have been unique. Planters elsewhere in the Americas often exchanged political loyalty for security of income and tenure (sometimes as absentee owners) (Klein and Luna 2009; Tomich 2016). Legal protections for debtors limited the flows of credit and thus also immigration to Brazil and the Spanish and French colonies, such that large planters simply had less competitors to worry about. By contrast, the relatively smaller plantations in the US faced the prospect of being displaced by an upwardly‐mobile class of small farmers with easy access to credit (Oakes 1983). They were thus compelled to borrow, innovate and adopt the latest techniques of production to preserve their wealth and status.

What are the stakes of recognizing this distinctively capitalist dynamic of American slavery? The point is not to identify capitalism's "original sin", nor to suggest that American capitalism couldn't have developed without slavery. The point is rather, firstly, to identify and understand the _differentia specifica _ of American slavery. Secondly, to correct the misconception that capitalist accumulation can only be based on free wage labor. We can now add that capitalism need not emerge along the same lines as the agrarian transitions identified by Brenner and Wood in the European cases. Rather, the main preconditions for capitalist patterns of accumulation are simply the spread of viable, liquid markets in capital and labor, and the elimination of subsistence alternatives to production for the market. In the American case I have argued this was achieved through a combination of violent expropriation and a creditor‐friendly legal system. The violent enslavement of millions of Africans and their progeny proved an effective means of commodifying labor in a context in which the violent expropriation of native lands gave European settlers a ready alternative to selling their labor. In that context debt and foreclosure became an important mechanism for enforcing capitalist patterns of behavior, for it both ensured the liquidity of capital and slave labor markets, and closed off alternative pathways of (non‐) development..

APPENDIX

MEASURING SLAVE EXPLOITATION RATES

This article has provided a set of theoretical arguments about the capitalist nature of antebellum slavery. One empirical implication of this argument is that one can meaningfully compare the rate of exploitation of slaves and wage laborers. In a separate article Duncan Foley and I have modeled slave prices as the capitalized "excess surplus value" produced by slaves, or the excess of the rate of exploitation of slaves over that of wage laborers (Clegg and Foley 2018). This excess surplus value arose because slaves could be forced to work harder at a lower standard of subsistence than wage laborers, who were free to move between individual employers and also between sectors by farming frontier lands. As part of that article we presented some comparative empirical estimates of exploitation rates in wage labor based manufacturing and on slave plantations. In this appendix I add several new estimates and consider some theoretical and methodological questions pertaining to their estimation.

The Marxian rate of exploitation (_e _) is defined urn:x-wiley:09521909:media:johs12259:johs12259-math-0001, where _s _ is surplus value, and _υ _ is variable capital, or the wages of labor. If we consider that _s _ _υ _ is equal to value added per worker, the labor share can be written as urn:x-wiley:09521909:media:johs12259:johs12259-math-0002, and conversely urn:x-wiley:09521909:media:johs12259:johs12259-math-0003. Since the labor share is more intuitive and more commonly known than the exploitation rate, I will focus on measurements of the labor share.6969 The discussion of exploitation in the economic literature on slavery has been dominated by the neoclassical view of exploitation as the difference between factor compensation and marginal productivity, and has been unnecessarily complicated by the question of whether to discount returns over a slave's lifetime. For instance, Fogel and Engerman define the "Marxian rate of exploitation" of a slave as:

urn:x-wiley:09521909:media:johs12259:johs12259-math-0004
urn:x-wiley:09521909:media:johs12259:johs12259-math-0004
where _MP _ _t _ is the marginal product of slave labor, _m _ is the average maintenance costs per slave, and _λ _ _t _ is the probability that a slave will die in year _t. _ But this is neither "Marxian," nor a rate of exploitation. It is more accurately described as the slaveowner's quasi‐rent‐share of the undiscounted value of a slave's expected lifetime marginal product. Vedder (1975) and Ransom and Sutch (1977) use simpler annual estimates, but also rely on questionable assumptions about the "marginal product" of slave labor.

Table 1 presents a number of estimates of labor shares in the United States and Jamaica. Slave exploitation rates are given as a range to flag the uncertainty in estimating slave consumption. Depending on the estimate of _m _ (maintenance costs), the proportion of net output received by slaves ranges from 12 (Foust and Swan 1970) to 25 percent (Ransom and Sutch 1977). However even the upper bound of this estimate is consistently lower than both the wage share in manufacturing and the share of output received by freed people in the form of wages or crop shares.

Table 1. Comparative labor shares 1850–1870

1830	1850	1860	1870	1880
US manufacturing		52%	42%	43%	51%
US cotton					
slavesbb Here the denominator, _y _, is derived by taking the value of slave‐produced staples (cotton, molasses, rice, sugar and tobacco) per slave in agriculture (Towne and Rasmussen 1960; Weiss 1992), subtracting depreciation (Ransom and Sutch 1977, p. 211) and adding estimates of _m _, consumption per slave, from Conrad and Meyer (1958, p. 104), Foust and Swan (1970, p. 50) and Ransom and Sutch (1977, p. 211). These micro‐level estimates of the slave share (which assume a high degree of plantation self‐sufficiency) are consistent with more macro estimates. Data collected by Lindert and Williamson (2016) (kindly shared with the authors) indicate that slave consumption as a share of Southern property incomes in 1860 was 23%.
wage plantationscc Weighted averages (adjusted for population, age and sex) of reported state‐level averages of "cotton per hand" (1867) and annual wages (1867, 1868) from a USDA survey of "our regular corps of reporters and agricultural editors, and planters distinguished in their vocation" (U.S.D.A. 1868). To estimate state‐level cotton prices in 1867‐68 I back‐casted USDA reports of farm‐gate prices from 1882 using the national price series (U.S.D.A. 1927; Carter et al. 2006). I assume "per hand" includes women and children. sharecroppersdd See table 2. | 16–26% | 12–20% | 15–26% | 27% | 45% | | Jamaican sugar | | | | | | | slavesee From Eisner (1961). wage plantationsee From Eisner (1961). | 24% | 63% | | | |

a Authors' calculations from the Census of Manufacturers (Atack and Bateman 1999), assuming a 3% depreciation rate on capital stock.
b Here the denominator, _y _, is derived by taking the value of slave‐produced staples (cotton, molasses, rice, sugar and tobacco) per slave in agriculture (Towne and Rasmussen 1960; Weiss 1992), subtracting depreciation (Ransom and Sutch 1977, p. 211) and adding estimates of _m _, consumption per slave, from Conrad and Meyer (1958, p. 104), Foust and Swan (1970, p. 50) and Ransom and Sutch (1977, p. 211). These micro‐level estimates of the slave share (which assume a high degree of plantation self‐sufficiency) are consistent with more macro estimates. Data collected by Lindert and Williamson (2016) (kindly shared with the authors) indicate that slave consumption as a share of Southern property incomes in 1860 was 23%.
c Weighted averages (adjusted for population, age and sex) of reported state‐level averages of "cotton per hand" (1867) and annual wages (1867, 1868) from a USDA survey of "our regular corps of reporters and agricultural editors, and planters distinguished in their vocation" (U.S.D.A. 1868). To estimate state‐level cotton prices in 1867‐68 I back‐casted USDA reports of farm‐gate prices from 1882 using the national price series (U.S.D.A. 1927; Carter et al. 2006). I assume "per hand" includes women and children.
d See table 2.
e From Eisner (1961).
Table 2. Decomposition of output per worker in the cotton South, 1859 and 1879

All slaves (1859)	Slaves on large Plantations (1859)	All black tenants (1879)	Black share‐Croppers (1879)
_dollars per worker _	(1)	(2)	(3)	(4)
Gross output	129.5	149.2	64.6	63.3
Depreciation and raw materials	17.4	19.2	3.8	4.1
Surplus value (_s _)	83.2	97.8	33.5	32.5
To landlord			26.4	25.6
To furnishing merchant			7.1	6.9
Worker's consumption (_v _)	28.9	32.1	27.3	26.8
Labor share (_v/s _ _v _)	25.8%	24.7%	44.9%	45.2%
Exploitation rate (_s/v _)	287%	305%	123%	121%
"Marginal product of labor"	62.5	78.8	36.4	35.6
Source: Ransom and Sutch (1977: 3‐5), Ransom and Sutch (2001). "Workers" includes all slave and tenant family members, and gross output includes production for own‐consumption. I ignore Ransom and Sutch's imputed value of "housing services" and include supervisory costs in surplus value. Columns 1 and 2: Ransom and Sutch calculated output per slave on all plantations and on large plantations (those with more than 50 slaves) from the Parker Gallman sample of Southern farms in the 1860 agricultural census. Their estimates of slave consumption in 1860, from various sources, are approximate to Lindert and Williamson's more recent direct estimate of $29.9, although the latter also record higher indirect estimates ($59 and $64). Columns 3 and 4: Ransom and Sutch estimated output per black tenant and sharecropper for farms of less than 50 acres in their sample of cotton counties in the 1880 agricultural census, assuming tenants consumed 50% of the cotton crop (after deduction of fertilizer costs) plus own‐production. However, they did not provide estimates of depreciation. I applied their depreciation rates for 1860 to the value of land and equipment on tenant farms in their 1880 sample, deducting these costs from the landlord's share. The estimate of surplus value flowing to merchants is based on the reported difference between credit and cash prices. The final rows display Ransom and Sutch's estimates of the "marginal product" of labor, which in columns 1 and 2 they calculate as a residual after deducting the imputed contribution of land and capital, and in columns 3 and 4 they assume was equal to the tenant's share (it is higher than _v _ because it includes imputed housing services and interest payments to merchants). Note that this violates their assumption of non‐competitive labor markets.

Table 2 presents Ransom and Sutch's estimates of output and consumption for slaves and black sharecroppers in cotton growing areas of the South in 1859 and 1879. All the figures are nominal and recorded on a "per worker" basis that includes all family members.7070 Ransom and Sutch claim that women and children in sharecropping families were less involved in production than those in slave families, although their claim has been contested (Engerman 2001) If true it would imply that columns 3 and 4 underestimate "true" productivity. However, it will not affect the shares and rates. If we deflate the 1879 consumption measures (using Ransom and Sutch's cost of living index) then the average per capita income of black tenants and sharecroppers in 1879 ($31.4) is very similar to the per capita consumption of slaves in 1859 ($32.1), but slightly higher than the average for all slaves in cotton areas ($28.9). The absence of real income growth from 1859‐79 may be contrasted to the stark increase in the labor share of income—and concomitant fall in the exploitation rate—over the same time period.7171 Between 1859 and 1879 the labor share for blacks in the cotton South increased by 78% and the Marxian rate of exploitation fell by 59%, despite increased fertility and a higher ratio of children to adults in the postbellum period. Slaves in 1859 consumed only a quarter of the value of the goods they produced, whereas black sharecroppers in 1879 consumed 45%, approximately equal to the wage share in manufacturing at the time.

While detailed evidence on the distribution of income between former slaves and former masters is not presently available for other years or other categories of workers, some general patterns may be surmised from the existing literature. Firstly, and perhaps most surprisingly given the popular understanding of Jim Crow, studies tend to find little or no difference between the incomes of black and white tenants in any period between the end of slavery and the demise of sharecropping in the 1930s.7272 See e.g. Alston and Kauffman (2001). White sharecroppers and tenants appear to have had more success than blacks in climbing the tenancy ladder toward landownership. However, white landowners remained far less numerous than white tenants, and they often lost their land due to foreclosure. Secondly, there is reason to believe that the fall in the rate of exploitation from 1860 to 1880 occurred gradually, and may have been specifically associated with the emergence of sharecropping and share tenancy as dominant contractual forms.

Of course, to measure something is not to explain it, and the utility of a given measure lies in its capacity to shed light on the wider processes from which it necessarily abstracts. Both neoclassical and Marxian measures of exploitation record falling rates of exploitation in the decades following emancipation. But they suggest different interpretations. For the neoclassical measure of exploitation, which falls either to zero (Ransom and Sutch) or becomes negative (DeCanio), the explanation will tend to be sought either in the degree of competition in labor markets, or (if competition is limited) in the relative bargaining power of tenants and landlords. This has led to some confusion. For instance, DeCanio, taking for granted that slaves were "paid" less than their marginal product, interprets emancipation as a transition from "non‐competitive" to "competitive" labor markets.7373 To account for his own finding that sharecroppers were paid more than their marginal product DeCanio, referring to the model of Stiglitz (1974), simply suggests they were being compensated for inherent risk (DeCanio 1974). But slave markets were by all accounts highly competitive, probably more so than localized and often isolated postbellum labor and tenancy markets (Naidu and Dittmar 2012). The primary difference between the two lay not in the degree of competition but in the way property rights defined the residual claimant on labor's product (Engerman 1973).

##

REFERENCES__

Aitken, H. (1971). Did Slavery Pay?: Readings in the Economics of Black Slavery in the United States. Houghton Mifflin.
Alston, L. J., & Kauffman, K. D. (2001). Competition and the compensation of sharecroppers by race: A view from plantations in the early twentieth century. Ex‐ Plorations in Economic History_, _ 38(1), 181– 194.
Anderson, R., & Gallman, R. (1977). Slaves as fixed capital: Slave labor and southern economic development. The Journal of American History_, _ 64(1), 24– 46.
Anievas, A., & Nisancioglu, K. (2014). The poverty of political Marxism. International Socialist Review_, _ 94, 1– 25.
Ashworth, J. (2011). Towards a bourgeois revolution? Explaining the American civil war. Historical Materialism_, _ 19(4), 45– 57.
Atack, J., & Bateman, F. (1999). Nineteenth‐century US industrial development through the eyes of the census of manufactures. Historical Methods_, _ 32(4), 177.
Balleisen, E. J. (2001). Navigating Failure: Bankruptcy and Commercial Society in Antebellum America. University of North Carolina Press.
Baptist, E. (2014). The half has never been told: Slavery and the making of American capitalism. New York: Basic books.
Bateman, F., & Weiss, T. (1981). A Deplorable Scarcity: The Failure of Industrialization in the Slave Economy. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
Beckert, S. (2015). Empire of cotton: A global history. Vintage.
Beckert, S., Burgin, A., Hudson, P. J., Hyman, L., Lamoreaux, N., Marler, S., & Mihm, S. (2014). Interchange: The history of capitalism. Journal of American History_, _ 101(2), 503– 536.
Bertocchi, G., & Dimico, A. (2012). The racial gap in education and the legacy of slavery. Journal of Comparative Economics_, _ 40(4), 581– 595.
Blackburn, R. (2011). The American Crucible: Slavery, Emancipation and Human Rights. London: Verso.
Bodenhorn, H., & Rockoff, H. (1992). Regional interest rates in antebellum America. In Goldin, C. and Rockoff, (eds.) Strategic Factors in Nineteenth Century American Economic History: A Volume to Honor Robert W. Fogel. University of Chicago Press.
Brandon, P. (2017). From Williams's thesis to Williams thesis: An anti‐colonial Trajectory. International Review of Social History_, _ 62(2), 305– 327.
Brenner, R. (1976). Agrarian class structure and economic development in pre‐industrial Europe. Past & Present_, _ 70, 30– 75.
Brenner, R. (1977). The origins of capitalist development: A critique of neo‐Smithian Marx‐ ism. New Left Review I, 104.
Brenner, R. (1982). The agrarian roots of European capitalism. Past & Present_, _ 16– 113.
Brenner, R. (2007). Property and Progress: Where Adam Smith Went Wrong, in C. Wickham (Ed) Marxist History‐Writing for the Twenty‐First Century. Oxford University Press, 49– 111.
Broadberry, S., Campbell, B., & Van Leeuwen, B. (2011). The Sectoral Distribution of the Labour Force and Labour Productivity in Britain, 1381–1851. _Unpublished paper presented at HI‐POD Workshop Quantifying long run economic development, University of Warwick in Venice, Palazzo Pesaro Papafava _.
Carter, S. B., Gartner, S. S., Haines, M. R., Olmstead, A. L., Sutch, R., & Wright, G.. (2006). Historical Statistics of the United States Millennial Edition Online. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Chibber, V. (2017). Rescuing class from the cultural turn Catalyst_, _ 1(1).
Clegg, J. J. (2015). Capitalism and slavery. Critical Historical Studies_, _ 2(2), 281– 304.
Clegg, J. J. (2017). Credit market discipline and capitalist slavery in antebellum South Carolina. Social Science History_, _ 42(2), 343– 376.
Clegg, J. J., & Foley, D. (2018). A classical‐Marxian model of antebellum slavery. Cambridge Journal of Economics, 64(1), 24.
Coclanis, P. A. (2018). Slavery, Capitalism, and the Problem of Misprision. Journal of American Studies, 52(3), e46.
Cohen, G. (2000). Karl Marx's Theory of History: A Defence. Oxford University Press.
Coleman, A., & Hutchinson, W. (2006). Determinants of Slave Prices: Louisiana, 1725 to 1820. Vanderbilt University Department of Economics Working Papers 0624, Vanderbilt University Department of Economics.
Conrad, A., & Meyer, J. (1958). The economics of slavery in the ante bellum south. The Journal of Political Economy, 66(2), 95– 130.
CORE. (2017). The Economy: Economics for a Changing World. Oxford University Press.
David, P. A., Gutman, H. G., Sutch, R., Temin, P., & Wright, G. (1976). Reckoning with slavery: a critical study in the quantitative history of American Negro slavery. New York: Oxford University Press.
DeCanio, S. J. (1974). Agriculture in the Postbellum South: The Economics of Production and Supply. Cambridge: M.I.T. Press.
Delfino, S., & Gillespie, M. (2008). Technology, innovation, and Southern industrializa‐ tion: from the antebellum era to the computer age. University of Missouri.
Desmond, M. (2019). In order to understand the brutality of American capitalism, you have to start on the plantation. _The New York Times Magazine: 1619 Project. _
Deyle, S. (2005). Carry Me Back: The Domestic Slave Trade in American Life. Oxford University Press.
Dobb, M. (1963). Studies in the Development of Capitalism. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Du Bois, W. E. B. (1935). Black Reconstruction. An essay toward a history of the part which black folk played in the attempt to reconstruct democracy in America, 1860–1880. New York: Russel & Russel.
Egerton, D. R. (1996). Markets without a market revolution: Southern planters and capitalism. Journal of the Early Republic_, _ 16(2), 207– 221.
Einhorn, R. L. (2015). Slavery. Enterprise and Society_, _ 9(03), 491– 506.
Eisner, G. (1961). Jamaica 1830–1930: A Study in Economic Growth. Manchester University Press.
Elster, J. (1983). Exploitation, Freedom, and Justice. Nomos_, _ 26, 277– 304.
Engerman, S. L. (1967). The effects of slavery upon the southern economy: A review of the recent debate. Explorations in Entrepreneurial History, 4(2), 71– 97.
Engerman, S. L. (1973). Some considerations relating to property rights in man. The Journal of Economic History_, _ 33(1), 43– 65.
Engerman, S. L. (2001). One Kind of Freedom: A comparative perspective. Explorations in Economic History.
Fields, B. J. (1985). The Advent of Capitalist Agriculture: the New South in a Bourgeois World, in T. Glymph, & J. J. Kushma (Eds) Essays on the Postbellum Southern Economy. A & M University Press.
Fleischman, R. K., & Tyson, T. N. (2004). Accounting in service to racism: Monetizing slave property in the antebellum south. Critical Perspectives on Accounting_, _ 15(3), 376– 399.
Fleisig, H. (1976). Slavery, the supply of agricultural labor, and the industrialization of the south. The Journal of Economic History, 36(3), 572– 597.
Fogel, R. W. (1977). Explaining the relative efficiency of slave agriculture in the antebellum south. The American Economic Review, 67(3), 275– 296.
Fogel, R. W. (2006). The Slavery Debates, 1952–1990: A Retrospective. Walter Lynwood Fleming Lectures in Southern History. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press.
Fogel, R. W., & Engerman, S. L. (1975). Time on the Cross: The Economics of American Negro Slavery. Vol. I & II. New York: W. W. Norton & Company.
Follett, R. (2000). Slavery and plantation capitalism in Louisiana's sugar country. American Nineteenth Century History_, _ 1(3), 1– 27.
Foner, P. S. (1941). Business & slavery: the New York merchants & the irrepressible conflict. University of North Carolina Press.
Foust, J. D., & Swan, D. E. (1970). Productivity and profitability of antebellum slave labor: A micro‐approach. Agricultural History_, _ 44(1), 39– 62.
Gallman, R. E. (1992). "American economic growth before the Civil War: The testimony of the capital stock estimates". In Gallman and Wallis (eds.) American Economic Growth and Standards of Living before the Civil War. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 79–120.
Genovese, E. D. (1965). The Political Economy of Slavery: Studies in the Economy & Society of the Slave South. New York: Pantheon Books.
Genovese, E. D. (1971). In Red and Black: Marxian Explorations in Southern and Afro‐American History. New York: Vintage Books.
Genovese, E. D., & Fox‐Genovese, E. (1983). Fruits of Merchant Capital: Slavery and Bourgeois Property in the Rise and Expansion of Capitalism. New York: Oxford University Press.
Gray, L. (1933). History of Agriculture in the Southern United States to 1860. Washington.
Green, G. D. (1972). Finance and economic development in the Old South: Louisiana banking, 1804–1861. Stanford, Calif: Stanford University Press.
Hacker, L. M. (1940). The Triumph of American Capitalism: The Development of Forces in American History to the End of the Nineteenth Century. New York: Simon Schuste.
Hahn, S. (1983). Capitalists All! Reviews in American History, 11(2), 219– 225.
Harvey, D. (2010). A Companion to Marx's Capital. London: Verso.
Heier, J. R. (2010). Accounting for the business of suffering: A study of the antebellum Richmond, Virginia, slave trade. Abacus_, _ 46(1), 60– 83.
Himmel, R., & Novack, G. E. (1966). Marxist Essays in American History. New York: Merit Publishers.
Hudson, P. J. (2016). Racial Capitalism and the Dark Proletariat. _Boston Review. _
Huston, J. L. (1999). Property rights in slavery and the coming of the civil war. The Journal of Southern History, 65(2), 249– 286.
Huston, J. L. (2019). Slavery, capitalism, and the interpretations of the antebellum United States: The problem of definition. Civil War History, 65(2), 119– 156.
James, C. L. R. (1938). The Black Jacobins: Toussaint L'Ouverture and the San Domingo Revolution. Secker & Warburg.
James, C. L. R. (1943). The West Indies in Review: Recent Developments in the Caribbean Colonies. _The New International _ IX (6 (Whole No. 76)): 191–184.
James, C. (1939). Stalinism and negro history. CLR James and Revolutionary Marxism: Selected Writings by CLR James, New Jersey: Humanities Press (1994), 87– 179.
Johnson, W. (2004). The pedestal and the veil: Rethinking the capitalism/slavery Question. Journal of the Early Republic, 24(2), 299– 308.
Johnson, W. (2001). Soul by Soul: Life inside the Antebellum Slave Market. Harvard University Press.
Johnson, W. (2013). River of Dark Dreams. Harvard University Press.
Kilbourne, R. (1995). Debt, Investment, Slaves: Credit Relations in East Feliciana Parish, Louisiana, 1825–1885. University of Alabama Press.
Kilbourne, R. (2006). Slave agriculture and financial markets in antebellum America: the Bank of the United States in Mississippi, 1831–1852. Pickering & Chatto Publishers.
Klein, H. S., & Luna, F. V. (2009). Slavery in Brazil. Cambridge University Press.
Kolchin, P. (1993). American Slavery, 1619–1877. New York: Hill/Wang.
Lakwete, A. (2005). Inventing the cotton gin: machine and myth in Antebellum America. Johns Hopkins University Press.
Lebergott, S. (2009). The demand for land: The United States, 1820–1860. The Journal of Economic History, 45, 181.
Levy, J. (2012). The Mortgage Worked the Hardest: The Fate of Landed Independence in Nineteenth Century America, in M. Zakim, & G. Kornblith (Eds) Capitalism Takes Command: The Social Transformation of Nineteenth‐century America. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Linden, M. v. d., & Roth, K. H. (2013). Results and Prospects, in M. v. D. Linden, & K. H. Roth (Eds) Beyond Marx: Theorising the Global Labour Relations of the Twenty‐First Century. Leiden: Brill.
Lindert, P., & Williamson, J. (2016). Unequal Gains: American Growth and Inequality since 1700. The Princeton Economic History of the Western World. Princeton University Press.
Majewski, J. (2011). Modernizing a slave economy: the economic vision of the Confederate Nation. UNC Press.
Mandle, J. R. (1972). The plantation economy: An essay in definition. Science & Society_, _ 36(1), 49– 62.
Martin, B. (2010). Slavery's invisible engine: Mortgaging human property. The Journal of Southern History_, _ 76(4), 817– 866.
Marx, K. (1913). The poverty of philosophy. CH Kerr & Company.
Marx, K. (1935). Wage‐labour and capital & Value, price, and profit. New York: International Publishers.
Marx, K. (1968). Theories of Surplus‐Value. Moscow: Progress Publishers.
Marx, K. (1971). Capital. Vol. 1. London: Penguin.
Marx, K. (1973). Grundrisse: Foundations of the Critique of Political Economy. New York: Vintage Books.
Marx, K. (1981). Capital. Vol. 3. London: Pelican Books.
Marx, K. (2010). Economic manuscript of 1861–63. Vol. 30. Marx and Engels Collected Works. London: Lawrence/Wishart.
McCloskey, D. N. (2018). Slavery did not make America rich. Reason.
McCurry, S. (2017). Plunder of black life. Times Literary Supplement.
Moes, J. (1961). The absorption of Capital in Slave Labor in the ante‐bellum south and economic growth. The American Journal of Economics and Sociology, 20(5), 535– 541.
Morris, T. D. (1999). Southern slavery and the law, 1619–1860. University of North Carolina Press.
Murray, J. E., Olmstead, A. L., Logan, T. D., Pritchett, J. B., & Rousseau, P. L. (2015). Reviews of the half has never been told: Slavery and the making of American capitalism, by Edward E. Baptist. Journal of Economic History, 75, 919– 931.
Murray, P. (2016). The Mismeasure of Wealth: Essays on Marx and Social Form. Leiden: Brill.
Naidu, S., & Dittmar, J. (2012). Peculiar Institutions: Slavery and Labor Market Frictions in the USA. _Unpublished manuscript. _
Neal, L., & Williamson, J. G. (2014). The Cambridge History of Capitalism: Volume 1, The Rise of Capitalism: From Ancient Origins to 1848. Cambridge University Press.
Neptune, H. (2019). Throwin' Scholarly Shade: Eric Williams in the New Histories of Capitalism and Slavery. Journal of the Early Republic_, _ 39.
Oakes, J. (1983). The Ruling Race: A History of American Slaveholders. New York: Vintage Books.
Oakes, J. (2016). Capitalism and slavery and the civil war. International Labor and Working‐Class History, 89, 195– 220.
Olmstead, A. L., & Rhode, P. W. (2010). "Productivity Growth and the Regional Dynamics of Antebellum Southern Development": NBER Working Papers 16494, National Burea of Economic Research, Inc..
Olmstead, A. L., & Rhode, P. W. (2018). Cotton, slavery, and the new history of capitalism. Explorations in Economic History, 67, 1– 17.
Parker, W. N., & Klein, J. L. V. (1966). Productivity Growth in Grain Production in the United States, 1840–60 and 1900–10, in Output, Employment, and Productivity in the United States after, Dorothy S. Brady_, _ 523– 582. NBER.
Patterson, O. (1977). "Slavery." _Annual Review of Sociology 3 _, ‐:407–449.
Patterson, O. (1979). On slavery and slave formations. New Left Review, 117, 31– 67.
Phillips, U. B. (1910). The decadence of the plantation system. The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 35(1), 37– 41.
Post, C. (1982). The American road to capitalism. New Left Review, 133, 30– 51.
Post, C. (2011). The American Road to Capitalism: Studies in Class‐Structure, Economic Development, and Political Conflict, 1620–1877. Leiden: Brill.
Post, C. (2017). Slavery and the new history of capitalism. Catalyst, 1(1).
Post, C. (2018). Capitalist slavery in the great Caribbean? Almanack_, _ 19, 321– 330.
Ralph, M. (2012). " Life. . . in the midst of death": Notes on the relationship between slave insurance, life insurance and disability. Disability Studies Quarterly, 32(3).
Ransom, R. L., & Sutch, R. (1982). "The long run implications of capital absorption in slave labor."
Ransom, R. L., & Sutch, R. (2001). One kind of freedom: Reconsidered (and Turbo charged). Explorations in Economic History, 38(1), 6– 39.
Ransom, R., & Sutch, R. (1977). One Kind of Freedom: The Economic Consequences of Emancipation. Cambridge University Press.
Rockman, S. (2014). What makes the history of capitalism newsworthy? Journal of the Early Republic, 34, 439– 466.
S. Rockman, & S. Beckert, (Eds.) (2016). Slavery's Capitalism: A New History of American Economic Development. University of Pennsylvania Press.
Roediger, D. R. (2010). A white intellectual among thinking black intellectuals: George Rawick and the settings of genius. South Atlantic Quarterly, 109(2), 225– 247.
Rosenbloom, J. L. (2002). Looking for work, searching for workers: American labor markets during industrialization. Cambridge University Press.
Rosenthal, C. (2018). Accounting for slavery: Masters and management. Harvard University Press.
Schermerhorn, C. (2015). The business of slavery and the rise of American capitalism, 1815–1860. Yale University Press.
Schluter, H. (1913). Lincoln, Labor and Slavery: A Chapter from the Social History of America. New York: Socialist literature co.
Schweikart, L. (1987). Southern banks and economic growth in the antebellum period: A reassessment. The Journal of Southern History, 53(1), 19– 36.
Shugg, R. W. (1937). Survival of the plantation system in Louisiana. The Journal of Southern History, 3(3), 311.
Sloan, H. E. (2001). Principle and interest: Thomas Jefferson and the problem of debt. University of Virginia Press.
Stiglitz, J. E. (1974). Incentives and risk sharing in sharecropping. The Review of Economic Studies, 41(2), 219.
Stokes, M., & Conway, S. (1996). The Market Revolution in America: Social, Political, and Religious Expressions, 1800–1880. University Press of Virginia.
Sutch, R. (1965). The profitability of ante bellum slavery: Revisited. Southern Economic Journal, 31(4), 365– 377.
Sutch, R. C. (2018). The Economics of African American Slavery: The Cliometrics Debate. _National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series: _ 1–67.
Tadman, M. (1996). Speculators and Slaves: Masters, Traders, and Slaves in the Old South. University of Wisconsin Press.
Tomich, D. W. (2016). Slavery in the Circuit of Sugar: Martinique and the World‐Economy, 1830–1848. SUNY Press.
Towne, M., & Rasmussen, W. (1960). Farm gross product and gross investment in the nineteenth century, in The Conference on Research in Income and Wealth (Ed) Trends in the American Economy in the Nineteenth Century, p. 255– 316. Princeton University Press.
U.S.D.A. (1868). Report of the Commisioner of Agriculture for the Year 1867. Washington DC: Government Printing Office.
U.S.D.A. (1927). Prices of Farm Products Received by Producers. _USDA Statistical Bulletin. _
Vedder, R. K. (1975). The slave exploitation (expropriation) rate. Explorations in Economic History, 12(4), 453– 457.
Vedder, R. K., Gallaway, L. E., & Klingaman, D. (1978). Discrimination and Exploitation in antebellum American cotton textile manufacturing. Research in Economic History, 3, 217– 262.
Weber, M. (2002). The Protestant Ethic and the "Spirit" of Capitalism and Other Writings. Penguin Books.
Weiss, T. (1992). US Labor Force Estimates and Economic Growth, 1800–1860, in J. J. Wallis, & R. E. Gallman American Economic Growth and Standards of Living before the Civil War, 19– 78. University of Chicago Press.
Williams, E. (1944). Capitalism and Slavery. UNC Press.
Wood, E. (2002). The Origin of Capitalism: A Longer View. Verso Books.
Woodman, H. D. (1968). King Cotton and his retainers: Financing and marketing the cotton crop of the South, 1800–1925. Lexington: University of Kentucky Press.
Wright, G. (1978). The Political Economy of the Cotton South: Households, Markets, and Wealth in the Nineteenth Century. New York: W. W. Norton & Company.
Wright, G. (1986). Old South, new South: Revolutions in the southern economy since the Civil War. New York: Basic Books.
Wright, G. (2013). Slavery and American Economic Development. Baton Rouge: LSU Press.
Wright, G. (Forthcoming). Slavery and Anglo‐American Capitalism Revisited. The Economic History Review.
Zimmerman, A. (2016). Introduction, in A. Zimmerman (Ed) The Civil War in the United States. New York: International Publishers.